A cookie is a text file that is placed on your hard disk by a Web page server .
A listing is a product placed in the directory for sale .
After all , a home is the largest ( and most emotional ) investment most people will ever make .
While emotions are probably in high gear once you 've found a home you love , it 's important to remember that a home is an investment .
With so many questions , a consultation is the start of contributing positively to one 's future .
A classroom is a small community in and of itself .
The recent studies like studies before them for 30 years showed cancer , heart attacks , strokes , obesity , diabetes , etc. It is said where there is smoke there is fire , and the aspartame studies that continually show aspartame as a killer are a blazing conflagration that EFSA does n't know how to deal with .
An NTD is an opening in the spinal cord or brain that occurs very early in human development .
A pinhole is a small hole used in Confocal Microscopes at the detection side of the lenses to get rid of out-of-focus light , thus allowing to record real 3 D images ...
An analemma is the figure-of-eight shape that results if the Sun 's position in the sky is recorded at the same time of day throughout the year ...
( A light-year is the dis­tance light trav­els in a year . ) The star ca n't be seen with the un­aided eye , but easily can be with light bin ­ oc ­ u ­ lars , not far from the bright star Ve ­ ga .
A definition is no proof .
It was never seen by any of the Communists as " communism " itself , any more than a construction foreman would think that the act of building a home is the same as lounging on the couch inside a home .
So made myself a basilisk been a little inspired by uriblank hope she do n't mind .
So made myself a basilisk been a little inspired by lizardbeth.deviantart.com / hope she do n't mind .
A syringoma is a skin coloured or yellowish firm rounded bump , one to three millimetres in diameter .
A namespace is a first-class value that encapsulates the bindings available for dynamic evaluation .
If you are using a light bulb or two to heat an insulated box or cold frame , a thermostat is a good idea to insure there is no overheating .
A batch is the unit of work that passes from one stage to the next stage in a process .
Such an understanding is a powerful engine of social struggle .
A scope is a specific area of code , which is partially isolated from other areas of code .
To apply this term to young human beings and proffer it as a strategy is a verbally fascist insult and , as a policy proposed by an Interior Minister , is about as close as one can get to hollering " ethnic cleansing " without actually saying so .
Calling Mohammed a womanizer is the least of many other more perverted and criminal pejoratives he should be labeled .
Calling him a womanizer is a very polite way to refer to someone of Mohammed 's sexual criminality .
Just as a tissue is a new , bigger level of organization for a bunch of individual cells , these new social structures are a new bigger level for individual humans .
If a celebrity is a Southern conservative , it should be understood he 'll have bigoted views and should n't lose his job for expressing them , but if he 's a liberal he gets no such breaks ?
Death was regarded as a potential gateway between realms and a corpse was a threat to life and well-being .
A rubber is a full round , usually two games out of three .
( 7 ) A hansom was a horse-drawn cab that usually seated two or four people .
" Reading a book is the essence of interactivity , " he added , " bringing sentences to life in the mind .
A school is a place where authority may have to be enforced , a university , one would hope , a place of co-operation rather than coercion .
Anything and everything that wore a petticoat was an irritation to Jabe , and provoked his sarcasm or his abuse .
As a magnet is a collection of small rotating charges , no wonder that a weak effect , the rotation of the magnet , appears due to the change of its own spin field .
Not being able to access the care you need in a crisis is not acceptable : an emergency is an emergency .
A mycorrhiza is an association between a fungus and a plant root that results in the formation of distinct structures .
Sorry , but a deal is a deal .
This Panasonic SC-BTT 755 home cinema in a box is a case in point .
A second is the suggestion that heart attacks and strokes are more severe in people who take statins than in those who do not .
A cookie is a small file of information that is sent to your computer or mobile phone from a website so that the website can recognise your device if you return .
" Thou ' rt her leader , an thou 's a fine long tongue , and " ( Peter was just realizing his advantage ) " thou ' rt allus sayin ' what thou 'd do an ' what thou 'd say an ' how thou 'd manage children .
A maillon is a peice of industrial equipment that is occasionally used for climbing .
A highlight was a formation display by Mercedes Benz World 's Silver Arrows team as well as rare appearance by the McClaren Mercedes SLR 722 Sterling Moss Edition .
8.6.6 If a candidate is a full - or part-time member of the academic staff in the University , at least two external examiners must be appointed in addition to an internal moderator .
Sir Anthony : " Madam , a circulating library in a town is an ever-green tree of diabolical knowledge !
( 3 ) In these Regulations any reference to a regulation is a reference to a regulation of these Regulations , and any reference in a regulation to a paragraph is a reference to a paragraph of that regulation .
It must be remarked that the idea of playing twelve men a side was the Collegiate 's and not altogether in agreement with the School 's usual practices .
The amount of user effort spent in initiating and utilizing a search is an important parameter in deciding the efficiency of a search engine .
It 's been working for them , and the people shouting about how the team has to make contact are , I suspect , mainly the people wedded to the idea that a strikeout is a bad bad bad thing .
66 A quorum of a board is a majority of the trustees holding office at the time of the meeting of the board .
Even so , organising a wedding is no simple thing , I noticed that !
You know a solution is the right one when all the problems and constraints that popped up along the way suddenly slide into place and the outcome is elegantly simple .
A tip is a service charge you pay for the convenience of sitting down in a restaurant and having someone take your order , answer your questions , bring you your food , and dote on you .
Essentially , in science a hypothesis is an " educated guess " about how something works .
One definition of a genome is the compendium of all the genes in an organism .
One social program that I 've seen in the villages that had been a hindrance was the GA -- General Assistance Program funded through BIA .
Although getting institutional support for a film is a normal challenge for any director , it is even more challenging for Simmons because NO !
The music at suburban reform Temple Beth Elohim on Long Island that I heard when a child was a far cry from the profoundly moving sounds of the golden age of cantorial music .
It 's simple : When a novel is this good , you must buy it .
A magnetron is a tube in which electrons are subjected to both magnetic and electrical fields , producing an electromagnetic field with a microwave frequency of about 2,450 megaHertz ( MHz ) , which is 2.4 gigaHertz ( GHz ) .
And if you want to know why you should never spit the dummy , a dummy is the English word for what is known in America as a baby 's pacifier .
Such a man is a benevolent priest and a source of illumination to the whole world .
An ex-Muslim is a very dangerous thing .
Even though getting a papercut from a post-it is a stupid workplace injury , it should probably still be reported as one .
An account is a user name / password combination that identifies who a user is and confirms that they are who they say they are .
A paradigm is an example or model , one that is worthy of imitation or duplication .
Robert Sinclair , director of the Association of Mortgage Intermediaries ( AMI ) , said : " Buying a house is a substantial financial undertaking , and we have long argued that providing consumers with expert advice is a process that cannot be left to chance .
Swimwear and a towel is a must , and we recommend an old t-shirt to be worn in the swimming pool to avoid discomfort .
Booking a table was a good idea as they had another large party booked in , and the place is not huge .
A cookie is a piece of text which asks permission to be placed on Your computer 's hard drive .
A week is a week .
The intensity of a thunderstorm is a matter of great subjectivity .
An ICD is a small battery-powered device that can detect an abnormal heart rhythm and correct it by producing a small jolt of electricity .
Authoring a DVD is another task takes which requires specialist skill , and should be costed into the project .
A whistle would blow and everyone would start fishing and the first one to catch a fish was the winner .
My opinion of S.O being a moron is a matter of public record .
A draw was a fair result but the Cornish might have snatched victory ten minutes from time if the usually unerring boot of full-back Kieron Lewitt had not missed the final conversion by a whisker .
I cannot believe the latter , for to do so would condemn all crime victims to the status of historical mannequins rather than full human beings , unless becoming a victim is the natural outcome of passivity .
Whether you are looking into wedding / engagement photography or just want a nice shot of your parents on their anniversary , shooting a couple is a little more difficult than single portraiture .
A school is no place for a gun , a cemetery is no place for a birthday party , and these streets are no place for our children .
Now , Martha , in total ignorance of her master 's treachery , regarded him as a bachelor for life ; and as a bachelor is a solitary being , she was wont to solace him , when she brought his meals , by any stray bit or scrap of news which the village afforded .
However , these are dwarfed by the splendour of the Royal Palace , right across from our hotel , which provides an immense contrast to the poverty of the country at large , an example being the slum we rode past on the way out .
And by the early 1920 s , for anyone who wanted to contribute seriously to the discussion of US or European empire , such an appreciation was a prerequisite .
A macro is a sort of abbreviation which you can define once and then use later .
A bonus is the company 's 800 - fill down treated with DriDown , which adds water resistance to the plumes .
" Jesus the Scapegoat 's ministry begins , then , with another scapegoat figure , the demoniac in the synagogue at Capernaum : " The forces that make him an outcast are the ones who recognize Jesus as their nemesis .
A uniform is a passport .
A colonel is a father -- que diable !
Everybody agreed that operating systems that do multiple things at a time were the next step , and Multics was the best hope in that direction .
An assignment was a command .
If I understand it correctly , and think about it , a macro based on a pipeline is an interesting thing to have in your toolbox .
My favorite " church " area in a game is the Royal Chapel area of Castlevania : Symphony of the Night .
We all know that a palindrome is a word or sentence that reads the same backwards as forward .
A bunker is an awfu ' place , An ' tries the temper weel nae doot , Ye dicht the sweit frae aff your face , An ' tine a ' houps o ' gettin ' oot .
Do you remember that one of the events that ended that prison as a prison was an Indian uprising and occupation from 1969 to 1971 .
What 's learned as a child is the ability to label .
He said being an informant was the worst thing he has ever done .
The brute force of a werewolf is a turn off too .
A corollary was the frequent use of allegory when treating historical events .
With ourselves the dropping of an acquaintance is a ticklish and disagreeable business .
Sometimes taking a conflict out into a walk is the best thing for all involved .
I offered a prayer-it was the prayer of my heart-at the beginning and close of the meeting .
A cousin is the film-maker Nils Gaup , whose 1987 drama Ofelas ( The Pathfinder ) , based on a 12th- century myth , was nominated for an Oscar .
According to the National Autistic Society ( NAS ) , people with the condition say a job is the one thing that would really improve their lives .
To be a close ally of such a country is both sensible and necessary , as France has understood .
running a campaign is all well and good and maybe you will acheive something .-- then the fun really starts , cos whatever you get put in place needs enforceing !!
In the UK an RCD is the preferred method of ADS on a TT .
The TOWIE effect - which has seen huge publicity boosts for the county 's clubs , bars and restaurants and led to a surge in visitors keen to experience the county 's celebrated nightlife , has without a doubt been a lifeline for many .
I do miss running water - fetching supplies from the nearby farm a couple of times a week is a chore .
" A story 's a tale ; a tail 's a brush ; a brush is a broom ; a brougham 's a carriage ; a carriage is a gig ; a gig 's a trap ; a trap 's a snare ; a snare 's a gin ; gin 's a spirit ; and a spirit 's a ghost .
It 's like trying to convince a democrat that being a republican is the way to go .
A stair-rod is a thin strip of metal which keeps a stair carpet attached to a stair .
( Afrikaans ) " It 's raining old maids with knobkieries " , a knobkierie being a club-like weapon with a wooden ball at one end .
" A dyke is a ditch dug round the outside of a field to drain it .
In the Inspector , the Group pane appears when a group is the selected object .
Affect is the act of changing something whereas an effect is the result of an action .
Pretty ordinary compared many which are posted here , but the fact that I could reach an entry into an array with incrementing a pointer was a revelation .
( A neurotransmitter is a chemical that relays messages between nerve cells . ) But at night , the pineal gland stops producing serotonin and instead makes melatonin .
Such a series is the result of a synthetical investigation we have given to the subject ; but this mode of inquiry is so deceptive , and has led to so many erroneous conclusions , that until each of these groups are submitted to a patient analysis , which has never yet been done , no correct opinion on the subject can be formed .
Knowledge about a market is no cinch to acquire , of course .
' To be a practitioner as well as a consultant is a very good combination .
While Newsom said the plan was step toward ending homelessness , Bill Hart , executive director of General Assistance Advocacy Project , said closing down a shelter is the last thing the city should be doing .
A stream is the output of a CSDL filter applied to input .
It can take time to find a principle , because finding a principle is a form of self-discovery ; you 're trying to figure out what your life is supposed to be about .
Now suppose that a man is a slave , subject to others , not subject to himself , unable to go where he likes .
" In British slang an anorak is a person , typically a man , who is an enthusiast interested in information regarded as boring or unfathomable by the rest of the population .
A privilege is a right reserved to a role that allows a user to access or perform actions in a specific area of the Dell Boomi platform .
1 A half-life is the amount of time it takes for half the nuclei of a radioactive isotope to decay , so that only half of the original radioactivity remains .2 Alpha (α)-particles are helium ions , produced in some types of radioactive decay .
A typical non-polar minimum temperature is -181 ° C e.g. at the Apollo 15 site ) .7 A substance is amphoteric when it shows reactions that are characteristic of both acids and bases .8 A becquerel is the measure of the number of disintegrations per second a radionuclide undergoes .
Because a stroke is a shape , it can be edited like any other shape , using the methods described in How to Edit Shapes .
The Battle Rifle 's melee attack shows three different animations at the same time instead of only one at a time-this was the first animation shown by Bungie of their proposed " melee combo " system , which was cut out of the final game due to time constraints .
An Antiphonary is a book that contains all the antiphons or responsorial chants required for the performance of the Divine Office .
" The fundamental rule when designing a touch-pad is this : Keep the wires as close as possible .
For example , a litre is a cubic decimetre and for practical purposes a litre of water weighs one kilogram .
A hectare is a square 100 m by 100 m , and there are 100 hectares in a square kilometre .
Inviting the press to get a rehearsal taster of a show is the way shows are routinely publicised in New York , but it 's seldom done here .
Data storage term 2 : Storage-area network ( SAN ) A SAN is a high-speed , special-purpose network ( or subnetwork ) that interconnects different kinds of data storage devices with associated data servers on behalf of a larger network of users .
Matt on the other hand , remarked that for nearly £ 12 , three small sausages and a salad were a bit thin : he felt slightly short-changed on quantity and declared the need for a pudding to fill himself up .
a kebab is a turkish dish , all stuck in one large pitta bread , with lots of healty fat to wash it down .
You should clearly understand that becoming a landlord is a business opportunity and must be seen as such .
If you have no business experience and limited time , you should seriously consider if becoming a landlord is a suitable option for you .
We were on a highway were the speed variation changed from 50 mph then to 70 mph then remained 70 mph on that road .
The conventions of codes represent a social dimension in semiotics : a code is a set of practices familiar to users of the medium operating within a broad cultural framework .
Later he adds that ' a hermeneutics is a grid supplied by the receiver ; a philosophical , aesthetic , or cultural grid which he applies to the text ' ( ibid . , 65 ) .
Our sense of self as a constancy is a social construction which is ' over-determined ' by a host of interacting codes within our culture ( Berger & Luckmann 1967 ; Burr 1995 ) .
Christian Metz added authorial style , and distinguished codes from sub-codes , where a sub-code was a particular choice from within a code e.g. western within genre , or naturalistic or expressionist lighting subcodes within the lighting code ) .
Another key convention involved in helping the viewer to make sense of the spatial organization of a scene is the so-called 180 ° rule .
Yuri Lotman argued that a poem is a ' system of systems ' - lexical , syntactical , metrical , morphological , phonological and so on - and that the relations between such systems generated powerful literary effects .
The " noise " in a system is the only holy part of any system , it is the rainforest , and we wish to preserve such noise in the manner of protecting what Charles Fort might have called an ecology of inspirations , just like the makers of corn-circles and the indeed the manufacturers of the MJ 12 papers .
' It 's still a good little town with lots of specialist shops - a milliner , cake-maker , dancewear shop , art shop , but the things that attract to me to a place are the arts and cultural activities .
Performance , too , is central here , though what 's being said is ambiguous : perhaps that actors are the unsung bearers of all our dreams and neuroses , or perhaps that the quasi-religious intensity applied to acting as a profession is the manifestation of a collective delusion .
The large detailed picture of the hall and grounds ( temp William and Mary , 1695 ) was painted by Siberechts .1 On an easel is a portrait of Henry , fifth Lord Middleton , which was painted in Rome by Blanchet in 1754 .
Hanging over a side-table is a detailed painting of a ford across the river Leen , near Lenton , by Siberechts .
A cookie is a small amount of data which is sent to your browser from a Web site 's computers and stored on your computer 's hard drive .
And here 's a foolproof false analogy for evolution deniers : " As the universe and a watch are both extremely complex , the universe must have been created by the equivalent of a watchmaker .
We all want you to survive and even to turn a profit , but nickel and dimeing us in a way that makes the entire traveling experience even more of a headache is the quickest way to lose any goodwill that you might still have following 9 / 11 .
An example is the short self-administered survey form .
The vision of a world where many worlds fit and everyone has a place is the social vision eclipsed by non-stop consumerism and self-righteousness / self-absorption / narcissism / solipsism / agorophobia ( Gracias Marcos and the Zapatistas ) .
To a woman was this honor given to be the first that saw the risen Redeemer , and that woman was NOT his virgin-mother .
Getting a sense of scale from a photograph is a clinical kind of knowledge .
CLIENTS : The best reason not to go to law school and not to become a lawyer is this : CLIENTS .
This is especially so , when a client is a chronic law breaker who shows no remorse over his / he actions .
Writing for a blog is a creative and social experience .
An Utterance is a prophecy in a foreign tongue for one or more foreigners in the Meeting so that they too are edified ( and / or spoken to by God ) .
One thing that may have shaken up the market a bit is the contract that agent Alec Schall was able to get for Flyers forward and former second overall pick James van Riemsdyk .
A bonus is another build , Quirky-Retro , built with the 2.6.30.5 kernel ( same as used in Puppy 4.3.1 ) .
When an intellectual is both intelligent and morally sound , he can serve as a true spirit guide to humanity .
Writing a story is a bit of a balancing act , or a jigsaw puzzle - all the pieces have to fit .
As well as being the legal way a priest is linked to a parish , a licensing is an opportunity to celebrate the life of the parish as it looks forward to a new chapter in its life .
The only community of which he was a pillar was the criminal community for , though he may have had no convictions , he was a criminal himself .
Judging a case under a rule is a judgment of subsumption , and comparing two cases is of course a judgement of comparison .
" Yes " is two taps on the palm of the hand , and " no " , or erasing an error is a rubbing or sweeping motion across the palm .
But when a show is that good , surely it will be .
A true bulb , like a narcissus , is made up of a basal plate with modified leaf bases forming the scales , while the bulk of a corm is a compressed stem .
Having to write , lecture or take workshops about a subject is a great way to learn more yourself .
A deflection is a shot which redirects a shot or a pass towards the goal from another player , by allowing the puck to strike the stick and carom towards the goal .
An avatar is a computer generated face with exaggerated facial expressions .
Self-cover : the paper used inside a booklet is the same as that used for the cover and is generally printed on the same press run .
Some idiot I pissed off on a forum is a scrape box advocating idiot .
A slump is a tragedy for those who lose their jobs and also for those who fear to lose them .
A cookie is a piece of text stored by your computers web browsing software , our site uses them to remember how you have previously used our site , we do this to make your shopping experience as pleasurable as possible .
At least a quarter are the British-born children of immigrants .
Taking part in sports , dance classes , swimming etc 3 -5 times a week is all good exercise and good fun , also cutting down on chocolate / crisps / biscuits , drinking diet soda instead of full sugar etc will all help with a minimal slow weight loss which should help with gaining a flatter tummy .
So whether a person is an atheist or a Christian or a Muslim , we all live by a faith of some sort .
A PC is a modular machine , COMAND units are not .
I think if there are any issues or there is no time to train or more than one dog at a time ( that is considerable weight / size ) then equipment is key and really a headcollar is the only thing that is going to make it easier to physically control that kind of size and weight .
As far as I can tell , to you , or under your conception , a species is a species , and a genus is a species too , and a family is a species too ; and a subspecies is a species too , for that matter .
A celebration was the order of the day for a Hastings couple in their seventies who have just marked their 50th wedding anniversary .
Carshalton 1 Hastings United 0 As United 's player-manager Sean Ray said last week , " A week is a long time in football " so what will he say about two weeks in football after this defeat away at ...
Has any 1 got any tips or ideas would maybe a presentation be a good idea ?
The pulling the knob off and squirting in cleaner info probably came from bezworld , A small improvement may be got but a replacement is the only real cure .
Moreover , we can do so with the consciousness that such a task is a matter of morality , a pursuit of truth and justice , which is among the highest callings we can embrace .
A trial is a public process where each party tells its own side of the case to a judge who makes a binding decision .
Sometimes an opinion is the only way to prove an important part of your case , such as why the roof leaks .
The main disadvantage is that a tetrahedral IS a space generating structure .
The pH of a solution is a measure of its acidity or alkalinity .
A corm is a bulb-like , shortened , swollen underground stem with one or more regenerative buds on it , enclosed by dry , scale-like leaf bases called tunics .
The deliberate ending of the life of a patient is a criminal act .
To allow anything else to be a determinant is a lie .
But I think anybody who wears a uniform is a great American .
" Knowing that something has four legs and fur , and knowing that a dog is an animal , a dog has four legs , and a dog has fur , might help you realize that , from a word you 've never seen before , that it is an animal .
A compact is an agreement or binding obligation .
An attempt , by force of arms , to destroy a government is an offense , by whatever means the constitutional compact may have been formed ; and such government has the right by the law of self-defense to pass acts for punishing the offender , unless that right is modified , restrained , or resumed by the constitutional act .
It would not do to say that our Constitution was only a league , but it is labored to prove it a compact ( which in one sense it is ) and then to argue that as a league is a compact every compact between nations must of course be a league , and that from such an engagement every sovereign power has a right to recede .
The Deuteronomy passage does not say that a man is a false prophet because his prophecy failed , only that the failed prophecy is false .
A good example of the rejection of a prophet is the story of Jeremiah , who was imprisoned and mistreated by the leaders of Judah , who refused to believe his message .
Under date of February 8 , 1843 , Joseph Smith wrote , " [ I ] visited with a brother and sister from Michigan who thought that ' a prophet is always a prophet ; ' but I told them that a prophet was a prophet only when he was acting as such " ( History of the Church 5:265 5:265 ) .
And I would just like to say that this debate in a way is a living tribute to Mel Carnahan because he loved the vigorous discussion of ideas in our democracy .
When you open a blank Excel spreadsheet , it is known as a " workbook " or " book " and each spreadsheet in a book is a known as a " worksheet " or " sheet .
A function is a calculation or operation that returns a result .
In high school you learned that that the area of a circle is the radius times pi squared or πr 2 .
Within a few decades , say the optimists , a repeal is all but certain .
A computer is a storyteller and algorithms are its tales .
A string is a sign that , under the watchful eye of the control , acts as signifier when data and as signified when a program .
If a person is this angry , you should get away as soon as possible .
Marketing a business is a lot easier when you 're offering a product that no one else in your market can match .
A website is a sales tool .
Last time I checked , a cougar was a predictor that preyed on fresh meat .
To therefore take the leap that this will * always * require a plugin is a leap of logic that defies the facts on the ground today .
A person been the actual Melbourne hawaiian for resident ) can be truly interested in billiards installs ?
The first thing to notice is that an egg is a very symmetric object .
( See " Black Jack " in Soldiers Three . ) squibbed a squib is a firework which explodes with a sharp ' crack .
Our job is to facilitate the network , and we think that a forum is the best way to allow people to discuss ideas .
Perhaps you 're right , and to engender such a situation was the Machiavellian masterplan from the word go !
A point is a point many will say , but we are now adrift in the bottom 3 with the Xmas slump and Arsenal looming , and after watching them dismantle Villa in the 1st half last night , we ca n't expect anything from that game .
A childminder is a person who looks after children from birth to eight years , in his / her own home , for more than two hours a day , and receives a reward for this service .
The Swedish philosopher Bengt Molander extends this thinking , saying that it is a common misunderstanding that a craft is a kind of manual labour ( Molander 1993 : 122 ) .
A gird was a circle of steel wire of a gauge heavy enough to maintain its shape without distorting while in use , of various sizes from one-and-a-half to three feet in diameter .
When your nearest beach is a war-zone away , taking a train is the only way to get there .
George E. Marsh II listed their uses to the teacher and / or designer , according to Mager : " An objective is a description of a performance you want learners to be able to exhibit before you consider them competent .
" The risk of being a victim is the lowest since records began .
Newman 's team are studying how algorithms can make sense of data streaming from a 3 D laser rangefinder and quickly decide whether an object is a car or pedestrian , for example .
Coming into a team of three making 150 meals a day was a big step after so long away from work .
What we considered is that part of his motivation to become a detective was a result of seeing them so glamourised in films .
Reading a map is a skill that children love , developing the sense of adventure that goes along with travelling and exploring !
I mean , I think anyone who 's an atheist is a fool , and anyone who 's devoted to one religion is a fool too .
A signal reflecting the electrical activity of a heart is an electrocardiogram ( ECG ) [ see Figure 1 bottom below ] .
This express is named , both by the public and the company , the " Corridor Train , " because a coach with a corridor is an unusual thing in England , and so the title has a distinctive meaning .
Buying a home is an emotional decision .
A tonsillectomy is a common procedure often done for children with recurrent sore throats .
Shortly after death , a prick with a scalpel is a serious matter , but when the cadaver has become green and is filled with bacteria , it is comparatively harmless .
Could not a miasm be some kind of zeitgeist which the whole race absorbs at the time of the epidemic , regardless of actual infection or not ?
Depending on the school , enrollees must earn anywhere from 16 to 28 credits for a diploma , a credit being the equivalent of a one-year high school course .
Such a position is a lie of the type designed to lower the awareness of the movement to the clear nexus which we have proved exists , again and again proved exists , between Media and Politicians and Political Police to marginalise our cause and ghettoise it .
You see Jack , an interview is a dialogue between two people - an interviewer and an interviewee - where the interviewer asks questions of the interviewee aimed to share the interviewees opinions and ideas with the interviewer 's audience .
The idea of writing a book was a long-time-coming , and of course , TF is his book .
According to the Pictorial Dictionary ( q.v. SNAFFLE-BIT ) " A snaffle-bit is the part of the bridle which goes into the horse 's mouth , and gives the rider control ; it is of light metal , without curb , and is jointed in its center .
A whale is a heraldic monster , just a dolphin is a heraldic monster , and has a CD against most standard outline fish , such as a catfish .
The submitters argued that a compendium was a period object compatible for use as a heraldic charge .
This ruling does not change the fact that a charge within an annulet or a mascle is the primary charge .
Do keep in mind that because these places become so popular in winter , you can expect to pay top dollar unless you are good at finding bargains or agree that a vacation is no time to scrimp .
A port is a system-wide message repository into which any thread can copy a buffer of data , and from which any thread can then retrieve the buffer .
The fastest long run without a stop is the one hundred and eighteen and a half miles from London to Bristol , which is made in exactly two hours .
nother German reader as provides us a photograph of him in his Teufelsmuetzehttp : Stefan Trikot ( das Trikot / die Trikots ) : A trikot is a shirt worn mainly by sportsmen .
Always remember that a review is a great way for a reader to get insight into a product , but the reader should also see and / or hear the product , when possible , before making a final purchasing decision .
A vaccine is the substance given to immunize your child .
Our Spanish class teacher says that her family 's favorite place for an outing is the park-like area at the " mitad del mundo .
Taking away keystrokes and forcing us to use a mouse was the beginning of productivity being harmed .
A module is the panel with all required optical filters and power supplies and excludes all other components ( signal processing , input board , bezel , back panel , tuner etc. ) The module pricing gap between 720 p PDP and 1080 p LCD is $ 303 .
" ( Joel 2:27 2:27 ) Such a revival is a necessity in every generation .
Answer : Selling a home is a seller 's market is far different from selling a home in a buyer 's market .
To bring ones personal beliefs into the situation is wrong , and for teams to tell location owners that they have ' exorcised ' or ' banished ' the ghost is not only closed-minded ( i.e. the investigator has only considered the idea that a ghost is the cause of the weird experience ) but it is also harmful to the mindset of the person who has had the scary or strange experience .
Has being a woman been an advantage or a disadvantage for you ?
So a conspiracy is a kind of partnership , in which each member becomes the agent of every other member ...
Richey and Hoover concluded that a mutiny was the most likely scenario , but kept the case open in case additional evidence was found .
A crate is the ideal answer to most early training , and adult and puppies rest and recuperation problems .
Alcohol consumption should be reduced to one or two drinks per day ( a drink is a glass of spirit , a glass of wine , or a half pint of beer ) .
A troll is a spoof message introduced into a list or chat room for the purpose of evoking maximum response .
The real problem with the current unit system is does n't take modern drinking patterns like a unit is a pint ( 58,6 cl ) of beer ( 2 % ABV ) , 17,5 cl of wine ( 8 % ABV ) or 2,5 cl of spirits ( 37,5 % ABV ) .
One idea I had for a location was a private pod on the London Eye .
A mug is a good size to use .
That is why a rethink is both necessary and advisable .
A boggart is a bogle with attitude .
A redcap is the ECU 's grenade equivalent , designed to allow an ECU trooper surprised by Kafers to distract them while he escapes from the immediate vicinity .
A wyrm is a small hermaphroditic parasite approximately 20 millimetres in length and 1 mm in diameter , and large numbers are passed in the faeces of all Pod 13 constructs .
The Fire Brigade decided that an electric radiator coming into contact with a curtain was the cause of the fire which was quickly subdued .
This is Nell , who for a while was the lady that Eidos used to promote Tomb Raider .
The value of a house is a tough one .
Where a borrower is a limited liability company , lenders will often look to take personal guarantees ( PGs ) from directors or shareholders to support repayment .
They also make it difficult to turn over the pages - if you are hoping to achieve publication , making life difficult for an editor is the wrong way to go about it .
If a planet is the biggest thing you consider and a flea the smallest , then people are small .
A prototype is an ideal , or > central , member .
A hulk is a very gloomy place , and these poor men require their spirits to be cheered as much as their physical sufferings to be attended to .
On the other side , the argument that now is a bad time for a referendum is a strong one .
A representative is a University employee elected or appointed in accordance with the appropriate union rules to represent a constituency of union members .
Searle as a man is the abstract hardware upon which the program is run .
An irritant is an agent which can cause cell damage if applied in sufficient concentration and for a long enough period .
A carcinogen is a chemical which may give rise to tumor production , which is an unrestrained malignant proliferation of a somatic cell , resulting in a progressively growing mass of abnormal tissue .
This eyrie of a village is all narrow lanes and four-storeyed houses , with sudden views over the sea that come on you unexpectedly when you turn a corner .
Usually presented in a ' tick box ' format , a valuation is a simple document which is primarily for the lender 's benefit to confirm that the property is worth the funds that are being lent against it .
hiya well I figure a train is a good 20 Cm long so it 's going to take longer than 10 MS for it to pass over the sensor fully , My only problem with that is if it sensing the train when it is half way over then it will mess up the calculations .
Another way I was looking at for launching a boat is a trailer extension ...
Of course , a remap is the better solution to this one .
While a system of benefits and credits is intended to provide social support whilst smoothing out the worst of these " edge effects " , proposals to abolish Child Benefit for any household in which an earner is a 40 % taxpayer are causing consternation .
I appreciate that a week is a long time in politics but it was only as recently as March this year , so only three months ago , that in response to the Constitution Committee 's report on the whole issue of devolution the Prime Minister stated that he had " no plans to merge either the roles of the territorial Secretaries of State or indeed their departments . .
Something I have n't written about for a while is the Ballet School .
I find that talking about single Christians finding a partner is a bit of a taboo subject in many christian circles ... lots of people just do n't want to talk about it never mind introduce any of their single friends !
A red 's a red .
To me a book is a message from the gods to mankind ; or , if not , should never be published at all .
And without speculating on the future situation , on possible payloads , sensors and countermeasures such a question is an impossible one .
The Earl of Onslow : My Lords , the Alzheimer 's Research Trust , of which my wife is president and in which I take a very serious interest , has produced figures in the very recent past showing that the cost of Alzheimer 's to society as a whole is a staggering £ 23 billion .
A statement of fact with no hint of a question is a particularly hard one to follow-up on .
In terms of efficiency , on the basis of our current running costs of about A $ 500,000 a year and the number of hits we receive , it costs less than one Australian cent per page accessed , where a page is the text of a whole case , or of a section of an Act , or of a chapter of a Report .
a bulb is all it required to secure 12 months ... we need to put some new discs on the front so maybe time for some slotted / drilled ones ... mmmmmmm we did have a few advisories though which made me laugh 1 : leak from rear axle ...
Title : Re : Senators not up for election Post by : imacrappaud on July 27 , 2011 , 08:52:1 0 PM I read his letter in the JEP online where he explained Philip Ozoufs grand acheivement of removing Jersey from a blacklist was a load of rubbish .
Let 's think out of the box today and talk about the thunderbolt , we all know that a thunderbolt is a discharge of lightning with thunder , flash and bang is what we call it .
Now we will step back in history and look at some numbers , Benjamin Franklin was on Earth between 1706 - 1790 and knowing that a thunderbolt is a discharge of lightning Mr .
If you think of ROK Player as a piece of technology , like an engine is a piece of technology , you could put that engine into a bus , or a taxi or a racing car .
The questions in an interview are a means to obtaining data to answer a research question , but the assumptions behind the research question should not be reflected in the interview questions .
" The only thing that stops a bad guy with a gun is a good guy with a gun " he told the crowd during the conference 's opening hour .
Carrying a gun is a skill and a privilege I value , even if I do n't exercise it daily .
Being hit by a meteor is a tragedy .
Dr Lamden , of PHE 's Cumbria and Lancashire Centre , said : " Visiting a farm is a very enjoyable experience for both children and adults alike but it 's important to remember that contact with farm animals carries a risk of infection because of the micro-organisms - or germs - they carry .
A crook is a crook , no matter what country employs him or domestic influence and support he taps .
Getting dogs to not move for even a moment is a challenge and half .
Even if I was n't a princess , how dare you act like those horrible men who think a woman is a piece of property with no will of her own !
Another important component of the Internet , which is equally important for the successful implementation of this technology in a country and an organisation is the management of its adoption and diffusion process .
( 2 ) A register is a mode of communication that is appropriate to a situation and audience ; you might not use slang with a professor or profanity with your parents while you might do so with friends .
A topic is a specific named resource configured in a JMS server .
One thing that helped a lot was a smattering of people from Spain and Greece and Tunisia who had been doing this sort of thing more recently .
A piano is a piano ...
In fact , this is where a guidebook is a valuable purchase to make .
A dollar spent by a bureaucrat is a dollar spent but a dollar lent by a banker does not necessarily mean a dollar spent .
An exception was the John Kerry deer-hunting issue .
And one of the things that as far as education is concerned that 's -- that seems to be a problem is the whole issue of teacher tenure .
A coup is a reduction of rights and liberties .
A coup is a devaluation of the intelligence , dignity , and the political learning process of citizens in a democracy .
A coup is a destruction of the credibility and prestige honor of the nation in the eyes of the people of the world .
A warrant is a right to exercise a future defined claim .
An Option is the ability to buy or sell purchased at a strike price during a specified time period , for an agreed cost .
A stupa is a symbolic monument which it is said Buddha uses to ascend and descend .
And , still , there are those of us on the left wondering if a referendum is a revolution .
But a job is a job .
A setback is an opportunity to improve things .
Since she could barely walk even before she broke her hip , and now was patently immobilised , such a comment was a cruel and mocking lie .
Having EA as a choice is a bit of a cop-out , considering they own a good 20 or so game companies , many of which the size of bungie .
But , yes , absolutely , John Connor turning from a badass into a wimp was the desecration of a childhood hero .
atm i have a 1.0 l and to be honest the genural lask of power is starting to get boring lol facilitys to do a conversion are no issue .
To me a supermarket is a supermarket - I ca n't get excited by one or the other - all thats different is the name and colour scheme .
, when i was younger finding a penny was a big deal , Dude , I 'm not going if your not going , Whoever invented gum , I love you .
Agreed waxing once a week is a waste of product i wash wash once a week and put a layer of qd on then wax every 2 -3 months Whats qd ?
Knowing how people perceive smoking these days , it 's clear to see that preventing others from ever knowing you 're a smoker is the best way to avoid the stigma attached .
I really do n't think parking a bus on the brow of a hill is an intelligent idea .
agree with conrad 222 grit guards personal choice but unless when dunking your mitt you like to stir the bottom of the bucket i dont believe they achieve anything and the same goes for a bucket is a bucket 99 p does the same job .
for a bullpup a tavor is a sexy looking gun but as much as the lee enfields and tommy guns looked cool there were things like the sten than just made WW 2 a bit less easy on the eye .
Having an autistic child having and ' episode ' in a car is no light matter , pulling over onto the hard shoulder to deal with this is less likely to cause an accident than carrying on driving .
So 1 or 2 panels at a time is a good start .
This Reefer Madness of climate blame is our legacy and real planet lovers are glad a crisis was an exaggeration .
An ARM is an adjustable mortgage rate .
Voting is a right , just like owning and carrying a firearm is a right .
Joan Chittister , OSB says A budget is a country 's theology walking .
A book is a bigger challenge .
A component is a unit of functionality such as a particular kernel scheduler or a device driver for a specific device .
A package is a special type of component .
Specifically , a package is the unit of distribution of components .
Therefore enabling a package means loading its configuration data into the appropriate tool , and disabling a package is an unload operation .
A configuration is a collection of user choices .
A template is a partial configuration , aimed at providing users with an appropriate starting point .
A map is a powerful tool for navigating and understanding physical , digital , intellectual , and social space .
Being a viking was an occupation - that of a raider or pirate .
Did you forget that the employee members of a union are the union and decide how the union acts ?
A tool that intercepts and observes users who visit a website is capturing their actual behavior , but sitting with users and having them show you how they use a website is an artifice .
A third is a maintenance crew chief for military fighter planes .
" That mention of not taking a detour is a detour on our voyage through the sentence .
Notice that sh after being cast to an integer is the same as the address of sh .
If a word is a bit new , or a bit obscene , the bowdlerisers delete it on the grounds it does not meet strict CFI , clearly applying a much harder test than for many other words .
As anyone with a newborn knows , having a baby is a great joy , but it is definitely not a vacation .
An example was the people who wanted to build " an animal superhighway " to allow wild animals to cross a highway safely - potentially worth doing , but not something that would appeal to the entire population .
A highlight was the night titled ' silence but louder ' .
When first published in 1895 the novel was met with outrage from his contemporaries and as a result was the last book Hardy wrote , although he lived on for another 33 years !
My favorite book as a child was A Wrinkle in Time .
Graduates need to up their job search game Joanna Symons , Careers Adviser at the University of Essex believes University leavers can still bag their dream job as long as they put in the work and that having a degree is an asset in the long term .
Whether on a crisp autumn morning or a warm summer evening , a conservatory is the ideal place to relax and enjoy views of your garden and beyond .
Adding a conservatory is the easiest , neatest and fastest way to add another room to your room .
The only thing that never changes for a manager is the pressure to get it right .
' Technically a minnow is a fresh water fish ( usually of the carp family ) and not found in the ocean .
At the bottom is an unstable boulder slope with a choice of two ways on : ascending the boulder slope leads to Insalubrious Route ; doubling back under the pitch and crawling through a choke is the way to Very Big Chamber : this latter route is the normal one taken .
] To the right , a slot is the top of a 10 m pitch .
A review is a means of giving an opinion on the worth of a film , book , product , to act as a way of helping readers of the review to decide whether or not to see the film , read the book etc. Critiques will tend to set a work under study in social context with other work in the genre , and analyse its importance and social commentary .
Becoming a city is the X Factor Colchester needs ... and deserves The bid for Colchester to become a city has received high profile backing .
" A model is an alternate , and usually simplified , representation of something .
Normally , the supplier of a service is the person who must account , to the tax authorities , for any VAT due on the supply .
Rumours surrounding the forthcoming new Apple TV have been swirling for several months now , but while the software giant has yet to confirm or deny the existence of a new HDTV to replace its media streaming set-top box , developing stories suggest that an announcement is all but imminent .
The reason given by the FDA for the delay in coming to a decision is the request by the maker of the drug , Barr Labs , to allow only women over the age of 16 to buy the drug over-the-counter .
Incentives for second earners have in some cases been reduced and yet the research shows that having two earners in a family is the most effective way to boost family income and avoid poverty .
Choosing a career is a big decision , but do n't be intimidated .
A PhD is the most internationally-recognised research qualification .
" They did n't have the full facts and took it in good faith that someone who reported a crime was a victim of crime .
But podcasts also offer a salutary reminder that the value of a library is the librarians who staff it .
A biopsy is a medical test involving the removal of cells or tissues for examination .
A lesion is a medical name for a skin blemish of some sort .
A mole is a clump of pigment cells in the skin .
A wart is a rough patch of skin .
A bowk is a sort of big bucket large enough , in this case for two men to get into .
As far as statute law is concerned a consideration is both parties potential earning capacity and SM should only be limited to a term when the recipient can reasonably expect to become self sufficient without undue hardship .
Notice the palace on the beach , a palace being a large rectangular cellar built around an open central courtyard where pilchards were cured and pressed .
First radio navigation aid to be used on a mission was the Gee set , this recorded directional signals which were marked on a special chart - accurate within a quarter of a mile over England , but prone to jamming over enemy territory .
Although strict transcription of a dialect is a difficult business , relying on subjective judgements ( since one person 's ear may be very unlike another 's ) , the great majority of the poems speak with authentic voices .
Yes , A jeep is the ideal way to travel up the D 514 !
Many of those questioned said having a child was the most popular reason for making a Will .
If you are building up a credit on your account then you should contact us and we 'll see whether a refund is the right thing to do at that point in time .
A customer sending an email is an official notification in writing , same as a letter sent through the post .
Jesus : An angel is an angel .
A year is a long time .
Caldera [ disambiguation ] A caldera is a volcanic feature formed by the collapse of land following a volcanic eruption .
A dream is a good explanation !!
An asteroid is a giant space rock that orbits the sun , like Earth .
Scientifically , an asteroid is a remnant from the birth of the solar system , offering clues about how our planetary system began .
So the argument is that going to an asteroid is a better testing ground than returning to the moon .
A school is the sum of its students and these young people represent its inchoate character , its pace , collective energy and direction - striving , variegated , mutable , but strong and unerring .
Therefore wishing to be a candidate is a potential conflict of interest , which has been discussed by the NEC and in the longer term it would be preferable to avoid .
I would propose that a year is a fair amount of time to set as a minimum .
scottishduck wrote : I would propose that a year is a fair amount of time to set as a minimum .
The melting point of a substance is the temperature at which it turns from a solid into a liquid while maintaining its chemical identity .
Israel is an ally of the USA as a tick is the ally of the dog !
Starting a garden is an act of faith , joy and , to be honest , a bit of an act of insanity .
Steal Like An Artist is a New York Times bestselling manifesto for creativity in the digital age .
Literally a cult-there was a human sacrifice at one of the professor 's after-exam parties , and it 'd turned ugly , as human sacrifice so often does .
Psychologist Michael Lamb testified that all available evidence shows that children raised by gay or lesbian parents are just as likely to be well-adjusted as children raised by heterosexual parents and that the gender of a parent is immaterial to whether an adult is a good parent .
Prior to Henry VIII , a yard was the distance from the tip of your nose to the tip of your middle finger .
A fathom was the distance between finger tips with arms outstretched .
A magnetron is a device invented during the war ; it was THE dominating source of microwave power for radar .
I do n't care if a musician is a heroin addict , they can still produce great music .
In the 2009 Finals against Orlando , Gasol averaged 18.6 points and was often the primary defender on Orlando 's Dwight Howard , whose 15.4 points a game was a dramatic dropoff from the 25.8 he put up against Cleveland in the Eastern Conference finals .
" A surge is the raising of troop levels and , like raising taxes , no one likes it .
Taxonomically speaking , a lobster is a marine crustacean of the family Homaridae , characterized by five pairs of jointed legs , the first pair terminating in large pincerish claws used for subduing prey .
Moreover , a crustacean is an aquatic arthropod of the class Crustacea , which comprises crabs , shrimp , barnacles , lobsters , and freshwater crayfish .
And an arthropod is an invertebrate member of the phylum Arthropoda , which phylum covers insects , spiders , crustaceans , and centipedes / millipedes , all of whose main commonality , besides the absence of a centralized brain-spine assembly , is a chitinous exoskeleton composed of segments , to which appendages are articulated in pairs .
A carpet is a grid system : thousands of fibers woven into or knotted to a matrix or a support surface at regular intervals .
The first thing that interests me when it comes to a theme is the ability to control the way the blog appears .
A president who governs a democratic country like a monarch is an imperial president .
The reason is that ownership is a binary threshold issue : either an author is a copyright owner in a book ( and thus a class member ) or she is n't .
And word up , anybody who calls Beasley a bust is a dumbass .
How can a pregnacy be a chock ??
How can I determine if a string is a text string or a binary string ?
To Craddock a sermon is the initiation of a congregation .
And just posting a blog is a feat for me !
A mainstream is a forceful , central current that carries in its path all the debris and livestock and entire vacationing families that get vortexed into it .
A product is a good gate because you start to ask ' how is this going to be consumed by the market ?
Using a TStopStartThread is a bit more complex than using a TWaitThread , because you have to explicitly create and free the TStopStartThread object yourself - but it takes about one hundred times as long to create and run a wait as to run a method in an existing stop / start thread .
This Core Strategy and the LDF as a whole is the spatial expression of that strategy .
A knurt is the work trunk written backwards .
A Conservative activist there Tweeted that a journalist was a whore and the police refused her complaint .
He is important to us today because his idea was that a child was a ' tabula rasa ' - an open slate where anything and everything could be programmed .
After all most parents would swell with pride if their child stated that becoming a doctor was the most important reason why he or she wanted to go to a grammar school .
An ethnologist is a person who studies the many facets of other humans .
Part of what makes Anna May Wong such an icon is the number of famous photographers that she sat to and collaborated with to produce images that transcend mere portraiture and elevate the results into high art .
With today 's announcement of the scrapping of lots of similar regulations , of course , some anti-EU types are feeling entirely justified in claiming that anyone who said the straight bananas story was a myth was a liar .
Another attraction that is worth a visit is the Dover Castle .
It 's too cool to play as a Ticker , which is a little creature that scurries up and can blow himself up , running into enemy lines and blowing yourself up , like a kamikaze is a lot of fun .
SEERAD can issue a subsequent decision , reversing a former decision that a project was a relevant project ( so releasing that project from the consent procedure and EIA process ) , if they receive further information or representations , which cause them to reconsider .
After all , a liberation is a liberation in the appearance ( it can have no other meaning ) , it will last for the duration of the body / mind .
In my opinion it is the height of folly to register any domain using an email address of any value as its appearance on a website is a guaranteed way to attract spam , but the cat is out of the bag and it 's now available in a variety of places .
For those thinking about the playoffs I suppose a point is the minimum requirement .
A yog is a fire , by the way .
In a first-person piece written before the closure announcement , he wrote the words : " A town without a newspaper is a town without a heart .
Anyway , even though the " Jean Monnet said it so it must be true " line of argument of the eurosceptic types convinced that the superstate is the EU 's final destination is utterly thwarted by the fact that a ) Monnet did n't actually say most of the things they attribute to him , and b ) the fact that if a week is a long time in politics then half a century is an eon ...
Also I had my fifth Common Blue of the summer , a female , when a singleton is a rarity in most years .
A table is a name and a form , yes , but it depends upon something else for its existence .
The causal body is the ignorance itself , and the idea of being an individual is the ahaṅkāra .
Being a priest or a religious is a wonderful calling by God in this life .
" ( Francis Bacon ) & # 182 " A Law is the Command of him , or them that have the Soveraign Power .
That 's a mission she embraced after suffering a hemorrhage during childbirth - she realized that while such an incident is a manageable emergency in the West , it is often a death sentence for mother and baby in other places .
To see yourself ( or anyone else ) with the head of an animal is a warning not to indulge too much in material or sensual pleasures .
To dream of a headache is a warning against confiding your private affairs to anyone .
Rescaling a pie is a troublesome operation , in particular because pie labels do not scale linearly .
A man is a sinner and asks Peter who had been INSTRUCTED by Jesus " what must I do ?
A sequence is an ordered collection of zero or more items .
For example , the string value of an element is the concatenation of the string values of all its descendant text nodes .
, etc. When doing a piece on the specificity of American cinephilia for a Lyon symposium I asked around : the film that made Mike Schlesinger ( Sony Repertory , and the guy who got It 's All True greenlighted at Paramount ) a cinephile was The Satan Bug ; for Joseph K. ( check me on this Mr .
In the second a square is the unit , viz. , one square inch .
In the third case a cube is the unit , and the cube is of three dimensions .
There would in such an existence be no cause and effect , but simply the gradual realization in a superficies of an already existent whole .
And such a stream is no inapt symbol of a line of mathematical thought , which , passing through difficult and abstract regions , sacrifices for the sake of its crystalline clearness the richness that comes to the more concrete studies .
A disadvantage is a very good filtrated water without particles which could clog the spray nozzles .
Baiting a fishhook in a dream is a prediction of a passionate new love affair .
But a child is a creature .
You ca n't sleep , you 're restless and slightly obsessed with falling too deep and malfunction , you 're a virus who 's intention is fucking up something You 're a crater on the face of a problem much greater It 's the violence , or lack thereof control Body and soul , digging a hole Is the blood stainless ?
A regulus is the purer or metallic part of a mineral , which sinks to the bottom of your crucible .
These details combine with many others to create standards that ensure that the only factor that will influence the outcome of a game is the player 's ability .
But to a subsistence farmer , an elephant is the destroyer of his crops and possibly of his life .
The use of a polarising filter can detect whether a cloud is an NLC or not .
[ 32 ] A rider is a provision not germane to the subject matter of the bill .
Losing a job is a major life-changing event for most people .
Terminating an employee is a process that needs extreme tact and careful handling .
A resignation email to a client is the most professional way to drop a client , regardless of your reason .
And a necktie is the only bit of flash a heterosexual guy of a certain age is allowed .
We recognise that in some instances , such as Somalia , the absence of an embassy is a question of security , but , as was pointed out by the Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee , the hon .
He said he thought printing a gun was the most compelling way to make his point , but added , " 3 - D printing is a ridiculous way of making gun parts .
Under the Gun Control Act of 1968 , the receiver is what determines whether or not a gun is a gun .
If and when an association is a member of a federal home loan bank , to secure advances of not more than an aggregate amount equal to its capital .
Suspenders was decoded to mean state secrets , a camel was an infidel , and to have a head full of cheese referred to a jellied loaf made from the chopped and boiled head and feet of a hog .
( The Athenians would n't even consider ' electives ' in foreign languages , for they considered them barbaric . ) But an educational system without a canon is no education at all -- and education in Canada and The States is approaching that abyss .
Being a part of a display is a way to tell the story of baseball .
The bit about the Hall of Fame being a museum is a distraction .
Being a writer and a musician as well as an entertainer is a great gig .
- Understanding the consumer segmentation as a whole was the transcendence for 38 % of participated contestants .
They argue that if the ruler of a country is an infidel and rules with infidel law , then basically the people who live in that country are infidels and that in general they will be considered infidels .
It is said that hitting a baseball is the most difficult task in sports .
I 'm simply an HSP ( Highly Sensitive Person ) , and the sensitivity that makes me empathic as a friend or intuitive as an actor is the same sensitivity that makes me cringe at ambulance sirens and feel nauseous at the slightest whiff of tobacco smoke .
I think that from either a conceptual or physical standpoint unknown states like U an X are neither states nor values , just a way or representing uncertainty , so i am not sure that they should be treated as equal to 0 or 1 .
The play is a perfect whole - not for a second is the theatrical spell broken .
" To my mind a story is a story and every story I write has some romance in it , so this did n't seem like much of a stretch to me .
With the plethora of animals out there , picking a pet is a difficult feat .
A mouse is a creature drawn to comfort .
Peter Lang came up with an information-processing model of imagery which presumes that an image is a functionally organized , definite set of propositions stored by the brain .
Unless the submitter can provide evidence that the annulet interlaced with a triquetra is a period heraldic motif considered to be a single charge , we will continue to interpret an triquetra and interlaced with an annulet as two charges .
To purchase a bitcoin is a purchase of zero asset backed value , the bitcoin trade is a market in pure speculation it has absolutely no other characteristics .
( 4 ) Whether the design of a study is a randomised controlled trial , a non-randomised comparative trial , a cohort study , or a case-control study , the aim should be for the groups being compared to be as similar as possible except for the particular difference being examined .
A player 's every move , football related or not , is scrutinized and evaluated .
A tax is a charge by the government on the income of an individual , corporation or trust , as well as the value of an estate or gift .
A graph is a collection nodes ( things ) and edges ( relationships ) that connect pairs of nodes .
In essence , each traversal along a link in a graph is a join , and joins are known to be very expensive .
Dave Winer 's How To Name a Product is a good read .
You can always tell which of the Libs in a room is the least swift on his mental feet because he will never let off on The War .
DVD | 75 min . | H / A Inheritance is the story of Monika Hertwig .
When the last word of a caution is the signal for any preparatory movement , it will be given as an executive word , and separated from the rest of the command by a pause as , On the Right Backwards - Wheel .
- when retiring in line a soldier being a blank file , after facing or turning about , will step up and occupy the vacant space in the proper rear rank .
At the same time , the questions that lead one to identify an opportunity are the same as they have always been-for instance , who are the customers , and how do they make decisions ?
For many couples , planning a wedding is the first time they 're called on to problem solve in any major way .
But if planning a wedding is the biggest source of distress in someone 's life , they really need to be a bit more grateful for the nice life they have .
A platform is a system that can be programmed and therefore customized by outside developers .
Keeping replicas to a minimum is the usual rule because they are hard to maintain .
ES : Everybody with ten fingers and a computer is a type designer .
A dispensation is an agreement reached between an employer and HMRC which reduces the volume of administration and paperwork that an employer has to complete relating to expenses .
A dispensation is a notice from HMRC confirming that for certain expenses , this is not required .
The Online Grading Database will show each player 's membership number so that it will be evident whether a player is an ECF member and at what level .
A referendum is a form of policy decision and it is the place of Sabbatical officers to argue for or against and , ultimately , carry out the policy of the Union .
Perched on a boulder was the unusual rock hyrax , which looks like a hamster but is in fact a member of the elephant family !
The basic design of a car is the first factor which has a fundamental effect on the way weight is redistributed during cornering etc. and this is related to the car 's centre of gravity .
" I got the business to a certain level , but I really could n't bring interior designers to my garage in Hemel Hempstead , so that 's why a showroom was the next step , " he explains .
A tenancy is an ' estate in land ' and different legally from , say , a lodger situation where the lodger just has the right to use the room .
What on earth I was doing anywhere near a pub is a fucking mystery .
Since a band is a foraging society they do not have a place of permanent residence because they are constantly moving around .
A sub division of a tribe is the " Big man " system and they have a very influential person as the leader of the group but this person does not have formal authority .
[ 11 ] : In Economics , an externality is the side-effect of an action that concerns third parties not involved in the action .
[ 78 ] : An example is the french law that limits legal work schedules to a maximum ( average ) of " 35 hours " per week .
superman - " A superman is a human being who has greater powers than the normal person -- physical , mental , or possibly supernatural .
The one factor that you ca n't find on a spreadsheet is the willingness of the people in government to lead change , And in Denmark every single one of them is engaged and willing to do whatever it takes to get Denmark to be a leader in electric vehicles .
A sketch is a quick representation and not necessarily artistic or well-drawn ( think stick figures ) .
" ' I promised my friend that I would say nothing of the matter , and a promise is a promise , ; said she ; ' but if I can really help her when so serious a charge is laid against her , and when her own mouth , poor darling , is closed by illness , then I think I am absolved from my promise .
" And it is n't made any easier by the fact that 1000 feet a mile is an AVERAGE .
Keeping a secret is a service .
Sending an e-mail or a text is a great way to remind them of this 8 .
" Creating a museum is a tremendous opportunity for that personal history to find its way into the bigger story of Ithaca and the Whartons ' legacy as pioneers in the movie industry , " she says .
An anarchist is an economic interventionist and the efforts of all properly identified anarchists support this assertion .
Living close to a sibling is the best gift .
An annotation is a brief summary of a book , article , or other publication .
A victory is a victory .
A computer is a device that takes input such as numbers , text , sound , image , animations , video , etc. , and converts it , returning the changed input ( processed input ) as output .
A line is a sequence of characters ending with either a carriage-return character ( ) or a newline character ( ) .
Determines whether a Component is an acceptable choice as the new focus owner .
protected boolean accept ( Component aComponent ) Determines whether a Component is an acceptable choice as the new focus owner .
Whether a computer was an IBM-branded IBM BIOS machine running PC-DOS on an Intel processor or a small shop custom job with an Award BIOS running DR-DOS on a Cyrix 386 , they all contributed to the " PC compatible " platform network effects for software and peripherals , even though they had not one vendor or brand in common .
The first to call you a coward is the last to fight , and the first to the police station .
" A t-shirt is a t-shirt - except this one is made with dignified conditions for workers , " says Maria Louzon , a University of Maryland student and national coordinator of United Students for Fair Trade .
If Fetch cannot determine whether an item is a file or folder , a combined folder / document icon is displayed .
An elephant does not stand for anything ; an elepant is an elephant .
Forgive me for quibbling with the wisdom of a celebrated muse , but I was offended by his first two pieces of advice : First , marry somebody you love and who thinks you being a writer is a good idea ; and second , do n't have children ...
Kirk : Sometimes a feeling is all we humans have to go on .
In this case , it was a time constraint ; an email can bounce around , as we who use email all know , but a fax is a phone call , direct from point-to-point and it 's finite , pin-pointable in time .
A diagnosis is a theory .
I told ' em I was fine , I did n't need no fucking help , it was just a misunderstanding is all , and they let it go .
Business Tools and Advice The UMA Safety & Courtesy Video provides valuable and helpful information for the motorcoach passenger , as well as providing safety guidelines to be followed in the event of an emergency-it 's a pre-trip must have !
Something I see in your work that interests me as a novelist is the way your characters reflect-or do n't reflect .
48 " It takes knowledge to know that a tomato is a fruit , and wisdom not to put it in a fruit salad .
• A facet is a particular aspect or feature of something .
You think of a box being a square , and like a cube .
One of the best gifts you can give an author is a review of her new book . ...
" Andy Warhol saying he wants to be a machine is this linear and Cartesian attitude developed on a simple level .
One of these is lack of sufficient manpower for the task ; another is her cruelty to the inhabitants of conquered areas ; a third is the underestimation of Chinese strength , which has resulted in the differences between military cliques , which , in turn , have been productive of many mistakes in the direction of her military forces .
A cookie is a small text file that is downloaded and saved to your hard drive when you visit a website .
A plugin is a piece of software that acts as an add-on to a web browser and gives the browser additional functionality .
An example of a plugin is the free Macromedia Flash Player , a plugin that allows the [ ...
There are a few precautions you can take to ensure that your computer does not fall victim to viruses , spyware , and other security threats while you surf the Web : Use a Firewall - A firewall is a piece of software that monitors communication between your computer and the internet , and only allows certain types of [ ...
Syntax : an expression is an atom or a list .
By convention if the first statement of a function is a string , it is treated as a documentation string .
Other times , a walk is an adventure , taking you on a trip far further than the one that your feet are taking .
Even if you are the only car on the street and even if it is going to rain ... and even if you are the current version of public transportation ... getting a tree is a treat for everyone ...
Stock price leaps NTT Communications Corp. 's purchase price of $ 60 a share was a 67 percent premium over Verio 's Friday closing stock price of $ 35 a share .
Interviewed on CBC about the death of actor Natasha Richardson after a fall on the Quebec ski hill two years ago , she emphasized the importance of wearing helmets and insisted that a concussion is a brain injury that needs immediate treatment .
) , the expections were out there , and it 's clear that Rove 's avoidance of an indictment is a pretty substantial development in the case .
" Working with Dick as an editor was a miraculous experience , " O ' Neil said .
Now , in the wake of Heller declaration that a gun is a constitutionally protected item under the Second Amendment , I ask whether and why we should not be greatly troubled by subjecting Plax to 3.5 or more years in prison simply for possessing this item .
on the day of a match is an incredible buzz , high , whatever it 's called , think prescription drugs within the family for water irretension , and 5 garbage bags hotglued to loosely form-fit cuz the fancy dancy plastic sweatclothes at REIs of the day were probably consumed by suburban fortunates ) .
( 2 ) The more intelligent a person is the more worth they have - or rather the more useful they are .
As these examples show , people are moving toward building a Semantic Web where relations can be established among any online pieces of information , whether an item is a document , photograph , tag , financial transaction , experiment result or abstract concept .
Their xenophobia as a species is a good example of that .
[ 4 ] A service is a function that is well defined , self-contained , and does not depend on the context or state of other services .
" At this point , a place is a place , " she decided .
" At this point in time , a place is a place .
Personally , I think denying them a target is the best response .
A baby is a blessing , not a punishment .
Why should * I * seek help for being able to SEE that an abortion is a form of RAPE on a woman , with medical instruments , and a brutal AXE-MURDER of her own child ?
A woman 's decision to have an abortion is a solemn , private matter between her , her care providers , and her God .
I do know that they provide free barrier contraception and OCPs on a sliding scale at far more reasonable cost than out of pocket at the pharmacy which starts at $ 30 a month with an insurance Rx plan , so as NATE pointed out at $ 12 a month is a great deal if that 's all their billing to the govt .
If you ca n't be a road be a trail , if you ca n't be the sun be a star .
Who thought a football was a good idea anyway ?
When we think a baby is a boy we comment on skill , what he 's doing .
A Thermapen is a different kind of thermometer ; it uses a different technology to read temperatures .
A submarine is a vessel capable of operating completely underwater .
" While Congress as an institution is no stranger to voter disenchantment , American voters are usually more charitable in their assessments of their own representatives in the national legislature .
I believe they 're at the point where such a change is the only apparent way this team ever realizes their tremendous potential .
" A lawyer is a person who knows the law " ( Black 's Law Dictionary & other . ) " It is said that all persons are presumed to know the law , meaning that ignorance of the Law excuses no one .
It 's a proposition in which a single concept is simply expressed in two different ways , for instance : " A bachelor is an unmarried male " or " Pure Awareness is pure and aware .
The anatomy of a cockroach is a magnificent example of the structure of an insect .
Instead , it held that before a tribunal can decide that a term of a contract was a sham , it had to be shown that both parties intended to mislead somebody .
Water Drinking 1.5 - 2.0 L water a day is a normal physiological water intake for an average adult and is one prerequisite for normal faecal transit .
The availability of car parking at a destination is an important influence on the choice of transport mode .
But many of the issues raised by an evaluation are the concern of HR - for example , the culture of the board and the behaviours of its members , as well as talent management and succession .
Morphine was good at provoking lucid dreams but hardly the key to survival in the ' real ' world , this world in which a gun was a gun , the end of the line a bullet , a full stop at the end of a final sentence .
Including voice acting when a character 's name was free to choose , however , was part of what made me twitch over Baten Kaitos , when there 'd all of a sudden be a blank in the middle of a comment to allow for the name .
An example is a Peugeot 107 three-door hatchback .
He who despairs over an event is a coward , but he who holds hopes for the human condition is a fool .-
A professional is a person who can do his best at a time when he does n't particularly feel like it .
There are some things in this establishment that are fundamental ... about which I shall deal plainly with you ... the government by a single person and a parliament is a fundamental ... and ... though I may seem to plead for myself , yet I do not : no , nor can any reasonable man say it ...
A factor is a person or an organisation who manages the common parts of a property on behalf of the owners .
For now though , the only chance the general public has to visit the airfield for an event is the Community Open Day .
The reason for the 10 ounces of meat a week was the fact that we bought our beef from Argentina .
Debate : Does it matter if a priest is a bad public speaker ?
So , does it matter if a priest is a bad public speaker ?
One of these days a Catholic journalist writing for a Catholic newspaper will ask whether or not it matters that a priest is a heretic .
A win is a win .
We think it self-evident that any dispute as to the form of such a notice is a question under section 22 ( 2 ) because such notices exist only under section 22 ( 2 ) and it is only by reference to that section that one can see what they ought to contain and what form they ought to take .
Samir , who says filming a film was a best knowledge of his life , pronounced a prominence was examination himself on a large screen .
Stated Case procedure could properly be regarded as part of the arbitration process , necessary to allow the arbiter to produce his award , but an appeal was a new and distinct process .
In the absence of taking the right amount of due care and attention , an accident with a cyclist is a common occurrence .
These passages distinguish between substantive matters committed to the determination of the Commissioners , such as the fixing of fair rents and determination of boundaries , and incidental matters which they may have had to decide in the process of dealing with these substantive matters , such as whether a person was a crofter .
Clearly also we have jurisdiction under paragraph ( a ) to determine whether a holding is a croft - and therefore whether it is subject to crofting legislation .
He remembered having been contacted by John Sinclair and Kenneth Sinclair about going up to Lochussie to do a valuation for them , the reason being that Kenneth was taking over the crofts from his father and a valuation was a routine thing to do in that situation .
An analogy was the lease of a tenement building with houses on top of a shop and it turning out that because of different statutory regimes applying to the two types of property the rent originally agreed for the whole building required to be apportioned .
The rent payable for a croft was the rent " fixed at the date of the letting " in terms of sec 6 ( 1 ) of the 1993 Act .
Thus the time for the ending of a tenancy is a matter of common interest both to a landlord and to his tenant .
One of the arguments in the case ( see the opinion of the Lord Ordinary at paragraph [ 38 ] ) was that any agreement to renounce a lease was an agreement to bring it to an end and that such an agreement was struck at by section 21 of the 1991 Act .
A collier is a coal miner .
If you 're looking for consistent support , and can handle restriction in the procedures of your business , maybe a franchise is the path for you .
A webinar is a training session that is conducted over the telephone and the internet using a web conferencing system .
All you need to join a webinar is a good internet connection and access to a telephone .
Such a farmer is a hypothetical figure included in the range of prudent and willing tenants that the arbitrator is required to consider .
( Nationalists often do this They may insist that a nation is the only legitimate unit of state formation , but deny that their own secessionist minorities constitute a legitimate nation ) .
They have recently shown that a culprit is a defect in the way certain cells communicate with their structural scaffolding .
It is important that this information is conveyed in this fashion wherever possible , as the notification to the Club of such a report is the factor that " triggers " the suspension under the VCC , rather than receipt of the report by the Hon Secretary .
Their decision to impose a flag was the ultimate expression of this logic , which at least creates the appearance of a nation state .
Once installed , the only feature remotely related to a tutorial was the help pop-ups that showed up once and a while throughout the game , but other than that , the player is really on his / her own in learning how to become a celebrity millionaire .
The ability to assign a list of values to a property is an important feature of CSS .
I am trained in Photoshop to a high level and can alter your images in many ways - perhaps a prop such as a cup is the wrong colour in a pic - it is possible to swap the colour over convincingly .
A doctor 's every instinct tells him / her that , while some of the stink has been scraped off this latest set of guidelines , there 's still plenty of opportunity for harm .
An aging alcoholic singer ( Bing Crosby ) desperate for a comeback was the theme of The Country Girl ( 1954 ) - the film that provided Grace Kelly with a Best Actress Oscar .
" A hallucination is a fact , not an error ; what is erroneous is a judgment based upon it .
In public political debate it is all the same ; a win is a win , a loss is a loss , no matter what lies or distortions are involved ( not to imply all involved are liars ) .
Something ive always been interested doing a degree being a mature student but ive always been scared to ask :( in a nut shell can anyone do a course ?
A 2 week course to become a sootie is an insult to them .
Heavies & lights all think in their respective thought processes & a task is a task , like you said a Tonka is a world away from a Puma etc. We did only get the basics on multi skilling but if you think about it a bulk of your mechs / fitters course was general aircraft work , F 700 , APs etc. You only learned your job at 3 a.m pi 22 ed wet through & covered in fuel & oil .
( More Idaho History ) HowStuffWorks " Maps of United States Vegetation " HowStuffWorks " Maps of United States Vegetation " An earthquake is a sudden rapid shaking of the earth caused by the shifting of rock beneath the earth 's surface .
and of the subject of junkies i saw a guy sat outside the tesco 's cashpoint last night who i know for a fact is a junkie as i had the misfortune to stumble across him whilst he was injecting earlier in the week .
some male quotes " A gentleman is any man who would n't hit a woman with his hat on .
" " A liberal is a man too broadminded to take his own side in a quarrel .
Some people always need to find blame rather than accept accidents can and do happen with little uns.I would prefer not to find out if a parent is this way by having them play outside in plain view of everyone .
Seven half steps , the distance from the 1st to the 8th key on a piano is a " perfect fifth " , called ' perfect ' because it is neither major nor minor , but applies to both major and minor scales and chords , and a ' fifth ' because though it is a distance of seven semitones on a keyboard , it is a distance of five steps within a major or minor scale .
In my experience just cleaning the drums with a solvent is a very short-term fix ( a week or so ) The metal in brake drums is quite porous and the fluid actually gets absorbed into the surface and the next time it is subjected to heat during braking the fluid will leech back out again contaminating your nice new brake shoes .
I generally figure a pool is a pool .
Thanks Interestingly , this morning getting in and starting all seems to be cleared , its was on for 2 days before i booked it in becuase i diddnt want it to be intermitant , only thing i think would of made a difference is the 6 junction * * * round the M 25 i have to do now , it wouldnt of got a clear run before that since early december .
Something I consider quite important in a printer is the design of the cartridges / heads .
For him , the significant thing about being a chorister was the discipline it inculcated .
" That being a woman was an odd business .
The suites , with two bedrooms and a kitchen were the best we have stayed ...
" A romantic is a person who seeks sublime moments , those rare experiences that are at the limits of human emotion , endurance , and understanding .
Really , when you think about it , a floodplain is a river 's kidney .
We have gone from what could have been a US surrender to al-Qaeda through a Congressional collapse of spine ( nothing more ) a few months back to a campaign were the Arab / Muslim street is now rising up against al-Qaeda and showing why the Democrats ( or Surrendercrats as I call them ) were incredibly wrong on Iraq .
A palindrome is any word , line , or even complete poem which reads the same backwards as it does forwards .
At the pretextual stage of the analysis , " the test for determining whether employees are similarly situated to a plaintiff is a rigorous one .
On March 29 , 2005 : " I believe beyond a doubt that a fetus is a human life deserving of legal protection , and that the right to life is the foundation of any moral society .
the texts are similar , but the supreme court of a state is the final arbiter of what the state constitution means .
A pixel is a relative unit as the size of a pixel is dependent on the ' dots per inch ' of the screen , so is fixed for each individual computer , but is not the same for all computers , whereas an inch , for example , is the same for all computers .
Pixels are relative to the viewing device , but at the end of the day , a pixel is a pixel .
Since the profile of a list is a vector with a value for every list , the strength of a person 's resemblance to the list is the sum of the values given in the profile for each list of which he or she is a member .
The sense of love and family within a coven is the best part .
What a rag is this US and " free world " leader candidate Gingrich .
Gibbs Phase Rule is expressed by the simple formulation : P + F = C + 2 , where P is the number of phases in the system A phase is any physically separable material in the system .
In Negative Magnitudes Kant also argues that the morality of an action is a function of the internal forces that motivate one to act , rather than of the external ( physical ) actions or their consequences .
A maxim is a subjective rule or policy of action : it says what you are doing and why .
A mop is a large swab , about 12 inches in diameter , often used instead of suction in low-resource hospitals during operations - they can be washed and reused repeatedly .
To live with a narcissist is an arduous and eroding task .
Eating in a restaurant is an impersonal , objectified , routine .
An antigen is any foreign substance which invades the body of an organism , while a pathogen is a living antigen ( such as viruses or bacteria ) which invade an organism .
Getting to know each other over dinner or during a party is a powerful enabler for future online communication .
The net mass balance of a glacier is the difference between the mass gain through accumulation of snow and the mass loss through ablation .
First , a theory is a fact .
That you consider a fact to be hierarchically related to a theory is the illuminating element of your misinformed opinion .
The big contribution of universities to computing was 30 or more years ago : before personal computers a university was the only opportunity most would have to get near a computer and experiment .
A troll is a troll is a troll .
A letter is a letter and a comment is a comment .
An offset is the withholding of all or a portion of a state income tax debt from your federal income tax refund .
Laptop pads that have vents but no fans can also increase the air flow around your laptop and they 're very portable , but for stronger cooling needs , a fan is the best way to go .
A coloniser is a less romantic and less heroic figure than an explorer , but his task is necessary and perhaps it is easier .
At first , both sides agreed that five cents a ride was a fair deal .
The strange notion that an object in motion will stay in motion perpetually in a vacuum is a restatement of Newton 's First Law of Motion .
A brush is a 2 D map that describes the depth that the editface commands should push into the cubes at various points .
A river is the symbol of a nation .
A Michelle is a nickname for a bowler taking 5 wickets .
If you thought The Man Without a Country was a sad story , that 's nothing compared to The Person Without a Planet .
A painting is all well and good , and movies are pretty awesome , and music is practically my life .
A ballet school or a hospital was a place to put them away for a few years and keep them off the streets .
Preparing to Interview Candidates : A Checklist is the next entry in this blog .
A cog in a machine is a fine thing to be when the machine is doing something worthwhile that you believe in .
One of my rules is , if I do n't think a book is a good buy , I wo n't offer a public review , although , if the author wants it , I am willing to give private reasons for the refusal .
The change in enthalpy of a system is the energy absorbed or produced during a chemical reaction .
The enthalpy change , ( ΔH ) for a reaction is the difference between enthalpy of the products and the enthalpy of the reactants .
Therefore , the average kinetic energy of molecules or atoms in a gas is the same for all particles at a particular temperature .
A manometer is an instrument used to measure gas pressure .
I 'd love to spend a week being that river .
A cough is a protective , primitive reflex in healthy individuals .
Hmmm , wanting a credential is the basis for being awarded the said credential ?
It may be true that a flower is a device for making seeds , and a book is a device for being published .
" A room is a place where you hide from the wolves outside and that 's all any room is .
Common sense would suggest that a calorie is a calorie is a calorie , right ?
This year 's International Women 's Day theme is " A promise is a promise : Time for action to end violence against women " .
Such a project is a challenge indeed , and as it will involve aspects crucial for understanding the whole Roman Empire , Haensch decided to invite international experts in the field to a conference held at Munich in July 2006 .
In Schematron , for instance , a schema is a set of rules like " the element named book must have an attribute named id and this attribute 's content must match this specific rule ...
A player is the next Ryan Giggs ?
a life is a life , everybody is / was somebodys child .
Lucyana , Brazil Telling my mother-in-law that she 's not supposed to eat like a horse is the same as flogging a dead horse .
The nearest place in my village to get a paper is a 5 minute drive away to the garage on the main road .
I have 3 kidz , and as much as i love her , i wouldnt trust her with my kids as i wouldnt trust any dog , a dog is a dog after all , and any dog can maim / kill , i was attacked by a labrador as a child , my eldest by a mastiff , i always put her on a lead when other dogs / children approach , it only takes once ...
The only thing more predictable than yet another staffy attack on a child is the idiots who try to defend this breed of dog .
I 've had dogs all my adult life until recently , even a pack of four at one time , and in my opinion a dog is a dog is a dog .
I will then keep my appointment with the usual vet for him to see him and if things still are n't right then maybe xrays or a scan is the next step .
" > Date : Tue , 22 Sep 2009 10:29:3 7 + 0100 > Subject : Re : FW : > From : emailblank > > Hi Carmen , > > If a so called expert states a dog is a pit bull you can fight it and > can win if you can prove your dog fits a different type of dog more > substantially than a pit bull type .
Therefore , I stick by my assertion that copyrighting a reproduction is an all too common subversion of why copyright came into existence .
But the lack of an undercoat is the original reason it is a fault .
Would a letter be the best approach ?
In most of the sectors in which it operates it is either unique or at least unusual in being owned by its members - a member being any customer who chooses to join its membership scheme on payment of a nominal £ 1 , taken out of their first dividend payment .
I have been told a chip is the best thing , but prior to that a DV ?
However , given that a patent is a government sanctioned monopoly for something which is not secret , I see no reason why the government should not require notification and publication of when that monopoly power is transferred between organisations .
But why approximately one black bear in 600,000 becomes a killer is a mystery .
A mammal is any vertebrate of the class Mammalia , having the body more or less covered with hair , nourishing the young with milk from the mammary glands , and , with the exception of the egg-laying monotremes , giving birth to live young .
Lists A list is a freeform data region that is often used for creating forms .
Charts A chart is a graphical representation of data .
A subreport is a report item that points to another report .
In contrast , a list is a freeform style .
A hymn is a simple religious poem set to music and often very similar to popular song forms being made up of verses frequently of 4 lines ( and occasionally followed by four lines of chorus ) .
A hymnal is a book of hymns containing the sheet music and / or the lyrics for a number of hymns .
" Writing models " A model is the single , definitive source of data about your data .
A : Because I was a better-than-average piano student and practiced fairly diligently , my parents and my piano teacher thought going to a conservatory was a likely option for me .
A histogram is a set of up to 200 values of a given column .
According to Melville ( who was wrong , but quaintly wrong ) , a whale is a fish with its tail turned sideways .
I 'm about ready to get my own outfit for the occasional but unavoidable times when a torch is the only solution .
Torches Kyhm and Gary ; A torch is a wonderfully versitile tool allowing the blacksmith to cheat unabashedly .
The most beautiful pedestal one can give an idea is a scaffold or a stake .
He referenced a case were the model has been used to accurately predict the failure of a pipeline in the Danish sector a few years ago .
The Direction attribute specifies whether an argument is an In , Out , or In / Out argument .
Individual scenes are entertaining in their own right , but the production as a whole is a lumbering mess .
As the editors acknowledge , an anthology is a selection and will inevitably leave out works that others will think should have been there .
The answer is that the rate of change at an instant is the limit of the average rates of change near that instant .
A coffin was an essential part of their equipment .
We know that choosing a dentist is an important health care decision , and we sincerely value your trust in us .
It is my firmly held belief ( delusion ? ) , that a job is an opportunity for personal growth learning double time .
Sounds like a bandsaw is the way to go .
A dome is the most efficient method to enclose a space but it is expensive to construct and then the space usage is inefficeint because things like furniture and book shelves do not fit a spherical surface .
" What made the latter film such a success was the comeuppance of the bad guys .
After all , a navy is an integral organisation , with its battleships , cruisers and its destroyers , and that navy must be regarded as deeply mutilated in respect of this extraordinarily important and indeed indispensable cruiser element .
The network at the venue was constantly down so we had no chance to show WebPositive which in a way was a good thing because it does n't support Japanese characters yet .
A mantra is a sound , word , or phrase , often said over and over again , to provide comfort and inspiration .
A child is the expression of this oneness .
I do n't think that being a pandering is a disease , unless being a politician is an illness .
A terrorist is a terrorist is a terrorist .
Coming forward as a witness is a really big step to take , but the new UKPPS will protect you , perhaps by relocation , and possibly by way of a complete identity change .
Hiring an agent for buying a property is an expensive and it can be done without their help is what many think .
Using a helicopter is a way different than the plane .
I had an extremely small part but that was fine with me , just to be on the set for a week was a blast .
Because , he said , " a church without a theology is a body without a head .
The King and government agrees with him that an evacuation is the best and decides to evacuate to Hamar as well .
credit hour(s) or credit(s) : Use figures with either one , except when a number is the first word in sentence .
A job is a complex thing that has an ebb and flow to it .
There has been a lot of interest and money in low level laser therapy ( LLLT ) for healing , but there is no reason to believe that the coherent light from a laser is any better than LEDs , sunlight , or halogen lights .
" In general , to over torque an aircraft is a bad thing , but the idea behind the air station 's box name is to challenge members to push beyond their personal limits every day - to demand more from themselves than they could handle yesterday , " said Austin .
A tracker is a list of requirements that you must complete for your school .
A requirement is an item that you need to complete for your tracker .
Being alone with a book is a way to die for many of them .
Bra Boys : " When Being A Man Is All You 've Got ?
A batt is a rectangular piece of insulation , made from fiberglass or mineral fibers , usually 8 feet long ( a standard ceiling height ) , and sold flat in packages .
An interdating is a word that fills a ( large ) gap in the record -- if we had an example from 1928 and then nothing until 1995 , we 'd probably want something in between to show that the word had been in use in this period .
An opinion is a belief that someone holds without complete proof or positive knowledge that it is correct .
A fever is a natural defense mechanism that our bodies use to destroy bacteria and viruses .
A generalization is a statement made about a large group or class of items based on observation or experience with a portion of that group or class .
An argument is a logical arrangement and presentation of ideas .
An assumption is an idea or principle the writer accepts as true and makes no effort to prove or substantiate .
A waypoint is a specific position on a chart .
Recording your time immediately after you complete a task is the best way to ensure accuracy .
If the court is considering the use of a disposal for an offence where a knife is a feature , then they should make reference to the need for the young person to participate in the scheme as part of the sentence .
Clicking to find out what a link is all about is an untargeted click which may have a lower conversion , if you are talking in marketing terms .
So a foundry is a place that casts metal , and a ' fount ' or ' font ' is a casting of an alphabet in metal .
A cookie is a text file stored on the user 's hard drive containing information about the user .
So to state that over a year 's time they are more likely to catch this illness when they are not on a cruise is an underwhelming statement by itself .
The hiring of a lawyer is an important decision that should not be based solely on advertisements .
The obvious downside of such an approach is a financial one .
A theme is the central idea or ideas explored by a literary work .
Mama One , Mama Two comes from my experiences with foster mothers and the children they cared for. " MacLachlan also noted in Horn Book that " the issues of a book are the same issues of life each day .
* * * An accessory is a person who assists in the commission of a crime .
Ask any woman andlouis vuitton she will tell you that a handbag is the one must-have omega watches accessory .
A movie is a distinct possibility at one of the many cinemas that show films in English .
As discussed infra , in 1995 , possession of a firearm without a license was an offense under G.L. c 269 , § 10 ( a ) .
With the popularity of Nelson Mandel across the world , a picture is this island would always be priceless .
An achievement is a reflection of joy , laughter 's and enjoyment .
in fact , i have stipulated that being present at a forum is the preferred way to cover an event .
A wargame is a game that represents a military simulation now including fantasy situations .
A will is a legal document used to distribute your assets ( personal property , real property , intangible assets ) to your named beneficiaries .
A will is a legal document that allows a person to make sure their final wishes are fulfilled .
Making a will is the only way you can choose trusted persons to act as your personal representatives , who will manage your estate and distribute it as you would have wanted .
A crown is a symbol of a king , or , the authority to rule .
But if you want your trebuchet now now NOW , a kit 's the way to go .
A reed is a thin piece of cane that vibrates when blown across .
Since a vocation is a calling or a summons by God , people tend to think of vocation only in terms of those called to Holy Orders or to a life of monasticism .
You argue that a mandate is a critical ingredient in any reform plan short of single payer .
What sort of a place is this world for such people ?
The final useful thing you can specify with relation to an image is the text which a non-graphical browser will produce when it encounters an image .
Now - it 's important to realise that each cell in a table is a completely independent entity and can have all its possible parameters specified independently .
" Leningrad 's Red Gazette denounced the irresponsible use of divorce and the abandonment of families without support and warned that " a father who leaves wife and children and feels as free as a bird is a criminal .
Informally , a transducer is an automaton which can write a symbol onto its output tape .
To give up on the chance of an equal society for your child and the belief that such a society is the best for your family is to give up your Socialist beliefs .
A person is a thing subsisting , not an accident or created quality , individual not any general but a particular one in number .
The difference between essence and person is this , the essence is absolute and comunitable , the person is respective and incommunicable as a man is a man absolutely in himself , but he is a ffather in respect of an other viz his son .
Nowadays the critic who tells you that a novel is a true picture of everyday life , that it is natural and probable , and so forth , believes that he has struck the best , if not the highest , note of praise .
But the pamphlet as a whole is a somewhat melancholy comment on the " literature " which its author is supposed to represent .
A shark is the only fish that can blink with both eyes .
Remember that an interview is a two-way process .
Creating a ' buzz ' on Twitter before an event is the most popular social media activity according to a survey from IT supplier Etherlive .
Since consuming every piece of information published about a match is a full-time job in itself , you should almost always begin by taking a look at the markets available , narrowing your focus to the ones which offer the greatest chance of producing a return .
Essentially an EDAP is a local plan for dealing with the period leading up to and following Peak Oil .
Only 77 % indicated that a formal cost-benefit analysis formed part of the decision-making process , and only 49 % agreed that such an analysis is the decisive factor , suggesting that the respondents themselves may be better informed than their boards in respective of the costs of video conferencing solutions .
" A person 's knowledge is a question of fact : such a fact is a very different thing from the objective question whether there was a reasonable likelihood of someone being present at the relevant time and place and whether a person ought to have foreseen that likelihood .
If a child is a visitor an occupier must " be prepared for children to be less careful than adults " : see section 2 ( 3 ) ( a ) of the English Act .
The sight of a queue is a patently visible sign of the failure of Boro 's ticket distribution systems .
But a commitment is a commitment , even if , as I arrived , I could hear the St .
The offence of establishing a radio station without a licence is an absolute offence ; no knowledge or mens rea was needed .
A file is each page and each image .
An isotope is a substance that consists of atoms whose nuclei all contain the same number of protons and number of neutrons .
A gene is any portion of chromosomal material that potentially lasts for enough generations to serve as a unit of natural selection .
A protein is any member of a group of complex nitrogenous substances that play an important part in the bodies of plants and animals .
A gamete is a reproductive cell .
A strategy is a term used for a pre-programmed behavioural policy adopted by an animal , i.e. it is presumed not to be conscious .
A phenotype is an observable characteristic of an organism produced by the interaction of its genes and environment e.g. eye colour , having four legs , inherited behavioural patterns .
A deme is a local breeding population of a species .
An avatar is a local economic population of a species .
A clunker is a duff , or worthless , thing , and the word was first coined in the US in the '40 's from the verb ' clunk ' .
His ' development ' as a character is a consequence , then , not of his mimicry , but of an increasing hybridity , a furthering of his own racial heterogeneity .
John Stapleton brought a writ of waste in three villages where it was pleaded that one place which was called a village was a hamlet of one of the other villages named in the writ and they were at issue on this in relation to the whole writ .
" Well , " said the old gentleman , " a woman was the cause of that , just as a woman is the cause of most of the other misfortunes that happen in the world .
An example is the Board of Equal Treatment , an impartial and independent board intended to provide free and easy access for individuals to complain about discrimination in the labour market and in other contexts .
We can also say that summative characteristics of an element are those which are the same within and outside the complex ; they may therefore be obtained by means of summation of characteristics and behavior of elements as known in isolation .
As long as a system is a unitary whole , a disturbance will be followed by the attainment of a new stationary state , due to the interactions within the system .
Rationale A game is an appropriate format for this type of scenario because it provides an enjoyable way to review information .
They needed money , and a pipeline is a cash cow , producing vast fees simply for letting oil or gas pass through one 's country .
For me , making a knife is a wonderful hobby .
A match is a set of three cards within the same suit .
I believe that a bubble is a theoretical possibility in the oil market , although I do not think that one is occurring at the moment .
I think my basic point is that trying to predict a bubble is the same as trying to predict how the wealth the internet created will be allocated or what forms of energy will exist in 2015 .
( Being a clerical-fascist is no hindrance to being in the European Union , but one may not have a clerical-fascist image . ) The idea was that after his speech people would think , ' The Jews would never let him address them if he was Ustasha .
A prolactinoma is a common noncancerous tumor affecting the pituitary gland .
The instructions for choosing an event are the same as that of Tell the Story and Movie Techniques .
If the GUESS was not so accurate and the actual intensity goes back above a 3 , then continue with global rounds on the outskirts of the event until that actual intensity on the event as a whole is a 3 or below .
A barrier is a synchronization object , like a semaphore .
I can believe Anna Schwartz , who changed macroeconomics forever , or I can believe Tyler Cowen , whose barely known claim to fame as a macroeconomis is an attack on a line of thought he demonstrably misunderstands , and never seriously studied .
A problem is a problem is a problem .
( The fact that it is a surplus or deficit is secondary , the fact that it is an imbalance is the real significance ) The surplus nature of productivity is creating an above average wedge in the output gap ( potential output versus realized GDP Productivity , you may recall , is a key component to potential GDP ) and that is at the heart of the matter .
Being a parent is the most wonderful-and hardest-job in the world .
An accommodation is a change that helps a student overcome or work around the disability .
Today the election of a president is a much duller affair .
If a killer was a virus , as with the influenza pandemic of 1918-the worst single demographic disaster in human history-nothing could stop it until it ran out of new victims .
" Being a city is the only way to go .
The winner of a round is the first person to " go out " as in Rummy , which means that the player can use all the cards in his / her hand to form complete equations .
The maximum number of cards to form an equation is the number of cards in a players hand .
To denote that a quantity is a divisor ( denominator ) , rather than a factor , the card will be arranged below the numerator card(s) .
Quantity MKSA Symbol(s) Definition Cards BASE UNITS Mass kg kilogram : equal to 1000 grams 5 A gram is the mass of 1 cubic centimeter of water at 4 [ [ ring ] ] C and 1.00 atmosphere pressure .
The Lord of the Rings trilogy as a whole is a rare work of art , reaching such great heights of creativity that I might not see it matched in my lifetime .
An example is the Allwinner A 20 ( appx $ 7 in volume ) vs e.g. a T.I $ 5 SoC or an Allwinner A 13 , neither of which have SATA or Ethernet .
The first workers to win a strike were the printers .
So an idol is the opposite of God ; it sucks life out of us instead of pouring it into us .
Pixel : A pixel is a single dot on a computer monitor .
" Human mortality is something that every person encounters at one point or another and thinking through what dying means to an individual is a fundamentally important part of the life cycle .
Even if the subsequent recovery may be slow such an outcome is a major achievement of economic policy .
However , if you do n't know , a browser is the software you use to visit and view Web sites on the Internet .
Remember , a smile is a passport that will take you wherever you want to go .
Additionally , filtering by values from my custom fields would be very helpful - particularly since I am using a custom field to determine if a ticket is a Bug Report or a Support Request .
Essentially , a blog is an easily updated Web-based diary .
An exception is the government 's suit against Bank of America Corp .
A game is an appropriate format for this situation because it provides repetition of the associations between the related facts .
( 1 ) For the purposes of section 82 ( enforcement of penalty charges ) a person is a certificated bailiff if he is authorised to act as such by a certificate signed -
An exception is the " Earth Star Tillandsia " which has wire instead of a socket allowing it to be attached to branches and backgrounds .
I do n't know the reasons why but could a pull-out be the next step ?
I think it is reasonable to suggest that starting a thread is an ' action ' and posting on it is a ' reaction ' .
Once both stories and soup had been devoured it was agreed that in future , in tough times , a stone and a story were a marvellous way to bring people together .
A hologram is a holographic photograph of a three-dimensional object , printed on two-dimensional paper , which appears to exist in three-dimensional space .
It was not a meeting-it was a pandemonium .
Also making an impression are an almost unrecognisable Kenneth Connor ( What a Carve-Up ! 1961 ) as the comic town drunk who first encounters the sinister monk , Leslie Dwyer ( Monster of Terror 1965 ) as the perpetually perplexed newspaper proprietor , and Valerie Hanson ( later a television director ) as Jeffries striking-looking niece / accomplice .
Had the fielders returned the ball to the top instead of the bottom of the stumps , this attempt would not have come near to success ; but on such a wicket , a draw was the only proper result between such teams .
A system is a sort of machine , and one reared in it is apt to be entangled in wheels within wheels , when the time comes for action ; or he finds that the machine , though of most excellent construction , will not work just when it is most wanted to do it .
A syllogism is a peculiar form of expression , in which every argument may be stated .
Delivery is a carrier 's term , and sounds too mechanical for elocution ; nevertheless , a speech is a delivery of information or incentive , and the manner of it is important .
The cleverer a speaker is the more surely the sting of his meaning will be in the tail of sentences of importance .
Some will ask - May not a recommendation be a good one though the giver of it be bad ?
' A duel was the immediate result .
If a person be an idiot it is of no use arguing with him .
A principle is a path .
Pc Bone used to say that picking Jessie up from school and giving her a hug was the " very best part of her day " .
To state that Darwin was not an atheist is a lie because this is not known .
Moreover , the issue of whether or not Darwin was an atheist is a red herring .
' and he showed me how to [ in loud and throaty voice ] instead of producing a sound being an RAF officer like this , killing my throat , [ projecting his voice without shouting in the way Williams demonstrated ] he showed me you could do it in quite a simple way without affecting your throat at all , you know what I mean ?
Such a gem is the Colleen Doran interpretation of a short Anne Rice vampire tale which was first published in Redbook in 1982 tenuously attached to the author 's ponderous Vampire Lestat universe but set in England in the 14th and 19th centuries .
A boast was a kind of promise a warrior made in front of other people .
feud A feud is a state of hatred and killing between two groups of people .
hilt The hilt of a sword is the part you hold it by .
hunting with his hawk A hawk is a bird with hooked beak which kills small animals ( like rabbits ) for food .
An eagle is a type of hawk .
Lau , Malaita : ' A woman is an alien spirit ' .
A library is a working tool and if it is treated properly as such is of invaluable assistance to the whole community .
We remind readers that an arrest is an accusation .
Though she loved the work , it was not an easy career choice but slowly she carved a role for herself , asking first herself , then those who would challenge her , why should n't a woman be a carpenter ?
A tomatillo is a large plant - 3 - 4 feet high and wide .
A dictionary will tell us that a mystic is a person who tries to achieve union with deity by techniques of contemplation or self-surrender .
Agreeing with Rudeboy - a troll is a safe investment , especially compared to other large creatures .
Kyle stated the $ 17.00 a foot was a very low price initially created by the fact that the contractor is coordinating the work only with himself and not with a separate subcontractor .
What happens when an exhibition is a program ?
We provide excellent quality service and refer to our customers as clients because we feel that a customer is a one-stop purchase , where as a client has built a relationship .
There is the system that is comprised by any significant attempt to describe or specify something ( a spec is a system ) .
The main thing holding the movie back a bit is the occasional heavy handedness of Roeg 's direction .
Meanwhile my Orcs also without loss ( Though if you ask Grommie those damned rats being his equals in a battle was a huge loss ) Wonder who these elves those other orcs are talking about !
" Top Secrets " which has been the # 1 Home based company for the second year in a row is a MEMBER OF THE BETTER BUSINESS BUREAU AND THE US CHAMBER OF COMMERCE .
Early in the Prior Analytics , Aristotle distinguishes a particular from a universal proposition : ' A proposition is a sentence affirming or denying something of something ; and this is either universal or particular or indefinite .
Commissioner Scarborough stated this is what is rubbing him the wrong way ; the consultants are the biggest problem the Board is going to get in trouble with ; this consultant gave the County the second highest impact fee for industry and the second lowest for convenience stores ; but a trip is a trip .
The Oklahoma Supreme Court has stated that the distinction between a cause and a condition is the element of foreseeability .
The distinction between a cause and a condition is the element of foreseeability . .
A term is a complete item , with no additional text before or after .
OCR for page 86 CRITICAL CODE : SOFTWARE PRODUCIBILITY FOR DEFENSE Box 4.2 Faults , Errors , Failures , and Hazards A failure is a manifestation of a system that is inconsistent with its functional or quality intent-it fails to perform to specification .
A hazard is a consequence to an organization or its mission that is the result of a system manifesting a failure .
A fault is a static flaw in the code at a particular place or region or identifiable set of places .
An example of a link is a test case that connects code with a particular expectation regarding behavior at an internal software interface .
Two of the most prominent are the Lipner - Howard method ( the SDC , or Secure Development Lifecycle ) and the method proposed by McGraw 2 An example is the Microsoft Static Driver Verifier tool developed by Tom Ball for verifying protocol compliance of Windows device driver code using model checking .
Because an anagram is a terrible thing to waste .
Had some thoughts about the youngbloods , and I decided that the axe / shield combo guy will be a generic hero for the next " Lad 's got talent " promotion I get with them , since a spear is a MUCH more fitting weapon for a youngblood , and true , the mustache throws the look off a bit !
A boat is an open system when it comes to sea water and fresh water .
Sometimes an article is a bit of a team effort , and those are tagged SOURCE Writers .
A group is the sum of its parts really ; the separation of sound and sight is an invention of recording technology .
What happens in a transistor is this : the reverse bias of the base-collector junction prevents collector current when the transistor is in cutoff mode ( that is , when there is no base current ) .
A meter is a measuring instrument .
A specification is a technical description of the device , listing its important features .
It worked for one of my feeds but not the other ( and half a result is no result , if I 'm going to merge feeds ) .
A torch is a simple product , but a lot of thought is needed to make sure that it will work well .
A circuit is a closed conducting path .
That 's right , but the courts are , and following a decision in a case called Manchester v Pinnock that was big news in legal circles last year courts have to consider whether evicting someone without them being able to mount a defence is a proportionate solution .
A character is a fictional object , not a person and it is something that can be ( and will be ) interpreted in many different ways .
A switch is a manual control component .
Depending on the function and the importance of your switch , always take little time to study it , because a switch is no joke .
A relay is an electro-mechanical switch capable of being remotely actuated .
Introduction Generally , dealing with a complaint is a straight-forward process , but in a minority of cases people pursue their complaints in a way which can either impede the investigation of their complaint or can have significant resource issues for authorities .
In the difficult conditions , a very decent match containing many mistakes , but lots of goal chances , in the second half both teams went for the win , both had chances to do so , but on the balance of play a draw was a fair result , it was also played like next goal wins .
The Bible was the central subject of our discussion , and the desire of the girls to have a Bible was the starting point in a relationship that eventually produced the first Bible study group - the basis of the church-to-be .
This macro will automatically be included with any graphical element we create as it is needed to implement the signals and slots mechanism that allows us to make the user interface responsive through the use of button clicks etc. Putting it simply a slot is a normal function in all ways except for the fact that it can be fired by a signal as well as being called normally .
A cross-drain is a system to convey water across a path or route .
A cut-off is a surface feature designed to divert water from the surface of a path or route .
In the UK a coalition is a very unusual state of political affairs ; the last time one was formed is 60 years ago during a time of war .
A ha-ha is a dry moat built to keep animals from roaming too close to a house .
Taxable benefit of personal use : Car : £ 5,272 Van : £ 3,000 Fuel provided for personal journeys : Car : £ 5,915 Van : £ 500 Total taxable benefit : Car : £ 11,187 Van : £ 3,500 In tax law a van is a goods vehicle that has a design weight not exceeding 3,500 kg .
Yes , almost $ 20 a person is a lot , but so far , they said it was their favorite day of the summer ( and we went to Hershey and the Jersey Shore ) .
" In the practical field of life , a person is an object of the senses .
The mental representation or mental image we have of a person is another thing .
If a student is a citizen of a country with a visa exemption agreement with Norway , they are allowed residence for 90 days without a visa ( a full list of countries with such an agreement is posted Norwegian Directorate of Immigration website ) .
Her memoir Sometimes I Feel Like a Nut was a National Bestseller and her latest is The Rock Star in Seat 3 A.Fin d her on twitter @ jillkargman .
" Mannequins do not suit Indian culture , " said Tawde , adding that a mannequin is a replica of a woman 's body and therefore , should be dressed conservatively .
Keeping a journal is a proven way to ease stress - studies have shown that patients with mental health problems who record their thoughts and feelings experience reduced symptoms of anxiety and depression .
Another set of properties worth a look are the 9 properties owned and operated by Aston Hotels & Resorts .
According to the Oxford English Dictionary , an icon is a person or thing regarded as a representative symbol of something .
If a colleague is the source of your morning stress , prepare mentally to not let their antics affect you .
Having taken the Fourier transform of each side , noting that the transform of a derivative is a multiple of the transform of the function sought , you solve the resulting equation for the transform and can then take the inverse transform to give you the solution you require .
A duality is an isomorphism , and more than that : it 's an isomorphism you construct so as to know right away what the inverse is .
A property is a thing you say about something else .
Being a writer is a lot like being someone with a product to sell .
An ushanka is the traditional Russian fur hat that you will find everywhere in souvenir shops .
A telnyashka is a navy blue and white striped shirt , widely used by the Russian Navy and Russian marines .
Sure ... an eBow is a really cool effect that we recommend to any guitarist interested in further sonic explorations of his instrument ... but using a violin bow can produce different sounds , and be much more challenging ... besides , playing an actual violin bow looks really cool onstage , too !
Cramming features , menus and on-screen prompts into an application is an easy road to go down , especially when you 're the developer , and so know your way around them .
A case was any patient with a diagnostic code for upper gastrointestinal bleeding and perforation .
Hiring a car is the ideal way to discover San Francisco .
Being an easy driving distance from the city centre , renting a car is the ideal way to get from the airport to the city .
One of the most important factors to consider when deciding on a package is the complexity of its interface .
A calorie is a [ ...
Could a virus be the cause of MS ?
But bringing a claim is no easy task .
The launch of a ship was an eminently newsworthy event , made even more attractive by the attendance of King Edward VII .
SAPStandard Assessment Procedure - the method used in the building regulations for calculating the energy use of a house is an energy rating which estimates the annual space and water heating energy use of a house .
Whilst hardly glowing , a recommendation was a recommendation , so I pursued this restaurant .
The way clouds scud across the sky in a gale is a lesson all by itself .
BMW are two a penny a vitesse is a rare item and the coupe looks just as good next to any other class car .
For those who do not know , a hulk was a ship ready for the breakers .
A bottler is an old term to describe the person collecting money and the device they collected the money in .
An example is the pain which can occur on the side of the body affected by a stroke , the thalamic or post-stroke syndrome .
So that old idea of paying $ 0.50 to read a page of a newspaper was the fallacy of a decade ago when we talked about micropayments .
A stateroom with a balcony is a great way to make your cruise adventure even more memorable and truly take in your destination .
If you are a vixen , it gives just as you work in stock-market or that you are waiter of a nocturnal club : a vixen is a vixen .
The objection to the UK point behind your question-would there be an objection were the UK Parliament to go ahead and legislate for a referendum on independence and say , " Here you are , folks , forget all that argument , here is the Bill authorising a referendum , let 's go ahead " - would not be , as Aidan O ' Neill rightly points out , legal .
Aidan O ' Neill : I think that is right-it would fall within the Sewel convention-but a convention is a convention .
* " In the vegetable this power or mode of propagation arises from two principles ; one is that every part of a vegetable is a whole ; the second arises from some having the power in every part ( under certain circumstances ) of retaining life , bringing in nourishment at every part , and of producing parts called roots .
" Every part of a vegetable is a whole .
The competitive advantage of a company is the major factor for the company to outplay its competitors .
" How swiftly those who 've made a pact , Can come to overlook the fact Or wish the reckoning be delayed But a debt is a debt , and must be paid .
After all , a lifetime is a long time to fit in to less than 3 hours !
Mind you I always thought psychopaths as a group are the * least * likely to take their own lives .
An example is the way dangerous , careless and speeding drivers are now often dealt with .
I do n't know if a ban is the answer .
Shaylon brought her new friend Jack , the greyhound along to show that fostering a dog is a form of volunteering .
The longer a ship is the more " efficient " balanced against bigger engines .
A psychopath is a person without a conscience .
Assuming that the evidential test is satisfied , paragraph 5.7 of the Code states that " [ a ] prosecution will usually take place unless there are public interest factors tending against prosecution which clearly outweigh those tending in favour " ( or , and I simplify , a caution is the more appropriate disposal , unlikely though that must be in a case of assisted suicide ) .
Being a conductor is a slightly different case from being a player , of course : the person with the stick is only silent musician in the orchestra , so the body is doing everything .
Writing a letter is a simple and effective way to connect with people who may feel isolated in your community or around the world .
Taking a trip to the Central Highlands to discover the wonders of nature is a worthwhile experience in the fall , according to baogia lai.vn. The most impressive poetic scenes of the province that are recommended for a visit are the Kon Ka Kinh and Kon Cha Rang tropical forests , the Ayun Pa and Phu Cuong waterfalls , Da Trang and Mo springs and Ayaun Ha lake , an extinct volcano .
In our view , an election is the only route by which Zimbabwe will be able to move forward sustainably .
A blog is a web log : a place for oddments of information that may or may not be interesting .
For example , a borrower who provides a mortgage over their house as security for a loan is a mortgagor .
Whether it is called a fee is no matter , there is just a substitution of a high quality borrower who can go direct to the capital markets , for a low quality borrower who goes to the banks .
A partnership is an interdependent system .
A two-layer chocolate cake baked from a mix is a good base for a festive berry dessert and a good choice with time at a premium .
A sailboat is all but invisible to a large ship on the water .
Americans think that filing a lawsuit is a form a victimology-that it 's an abdication of personal responsibility .
A phoneme is a unit of sound .
Becoming a parent is a big deal .
In order that these programs be kept device-independent , there is a standard definition of a " stream " : a stream is a functional object which takes one required argument and one optional argument .
" A leader is a vector of Lisp objects , of user-specified size , which may be tacked on to an array .
Budget - A budget is a tool that helps you gauge exactly where your finances are now , and helps you get them where you want to be .
A sword is a tool .
A society is a group of unequal beings organized to meet common needs .
A SPADE IS A SPADE BUT WHAT THE HELL IS THE DEFINITION OF A SPADE ?
A Sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible grace .
Warranty - Sometimes referred to as a guarantee , a warranty is an agreement which calls for the replacement or repair of tangible personal property with no additional charge for parts or labor , or both , based upon the happening of some unforseen occurrence , e.g. , the property needs repair within the warranty period .
If the target of a link is the same as the page on which it appears ( a self-link ) , it is displayed in bold , as in Help : Editing .
For Ryan Richards 11 , a scholarship is the first step in his dream of starting a medical clinic in a developing country .
A co-operative is an association of persons united voluntarily to meet their common economic , social , and cultural needs and aspirations through a jointly-owned and democratically-controlled enterprise .
A good quality diaper bag with all the important contents for a baby is an absolutely essential part of the baby 's stuff .
The reasonable middle view is that constructing an identity is a good thing ( if self-authorship is a good thing ) but the identity must make some kind of sense .
So you get into some very basic sociology here where it might be said that the church is an institution , but with equal justice , a church is a gang .
A neighborhood is a moral ecosystem , and Obama , the former community organizer , seems to have a better feel for that .
Treating him like a criminal is an abdication of that responsibility , and puts our nation at risk .
" A bureaucrat is the most despicable of men , though he is needed as vultures are needed , but one hardly admires vultures , whom bureaucrats so strangely resemble .
So a subscription is a nogo .
Signing a kernel is a hassle ?
Surely the whole point of a marriage is an attempt at a team effort .
This " no fault situation in a divorce is a joke " , so one partner commits adultery or just simply walks out and has very little money can clean the other party out and hide behind the no fault rule !
I do think though that the agreement has to be truly binding , i.e. should the marriage break down then the clauses should be unchallengeable , so the legal trade cannot try to cash in by starting squabbles - a contract is a contract as signed , not what someone thinks it should have been many years later - " oh , I did n't think it meant that " .
Sorry but an application is a legally binding document .
An affair is a decision , and we can excuse it all we like but its still a choice to cheat or not.I know some amazing people whose spouses had affairs , my mum being one of them .
One of the pleasures I look forward to when we come for a meet is an Ian Hug - I 'd put it in the top three of Best Hugs In the UK , in fact , I ca n't think of a better one so that makes you No 1 :thumbsup: Love to you , Barbara Anne and Audrey !
The dry ice machine had to be located in a room behind the backdrop , and this room ( we 'll call it " Dave 's Room " ) had to be in near total darkness , therefore a torch was the only form of light to see what he was doing ...
And a laugh is a laugh in any and every language .
kathryn I am the same as you , an affair is the breaking of a marriage as far as I am concerned .
It 's easy to see if a part is a user-replacable one e.g. headlight bulb ) , so that could be effectively discounted from the data .
I drive 1000 miles a week up and down the motorway - 74 mpg on a tankfull is the best I 've seen displayed .
You are so beautiful , too bad you are a fool is another one you do n't hear .
Going with a touchscreen is a logical progression from what Apple has done with the iMac , but it 's also a bit risky since it evokes the well-known " gorilla arm " problem .
A market place is a classic such space ; a laboratory is an equivalent scientific space .
Her argument is that a city is a place within overlapping networks associated with unique internal complexity : a highly diverse urban place is a successful dynamic city .
What Liberia needs most in a leader is a patriot who will put Liberia , the Liberian people and the constitution of the republic above all else .
The instability and unpredictability of low-wage work can lead to fluctuating family incomes Title search a detailed examination of the title records to ensure that the seller of a property is the legal owner and that there are no liens or other claims outstanding .
The only individuals who would be immediately affected by such a transfer are those currently in a post which is not regarded as a child care position under PoCSA but is regulated work with children under this Act .
Additionally , a charity is a children 's charity if its workers normally include persons doing regulated work and those workers are working under arrangements made for purposes which are not incidental to ( i.e. which are for ) the purposes for which the charity is established ( paragraph 27 ( a ) ) .
Therefore , whether a charity is a children 's charity by virtue of paragraph 27 ( a ) is dependent on the scope of the other provisions of schedule 2 .
( b ) the references to a firm of which a person was a member or employee at a particular time include references to a firm which holds itself out to be the successor of a firm of which that person was a member or employee at that time .
v. 9 we read , referring to some letter which God has not seen fit to give us , " I wrote to you in an epistle not to company with * fornicators , " { not of this world , for then must ye needs go out of the world ; but } " not to keep company , if any man that is called a brother be a fornicator , or covetous , or an idolater , or a railer , or a drunkard , or an extortioner ; with such a man , no , not to eat ...
A dog is the only creature that has seen its God ... you .
i think it speaks for itself ... not saying an animal is the cure to all allergies ... but if you dont expose you child to the weather , the sun , foods and medicine its body will fall behind ... can only assume its the same with animals .
I always thought that the showing of emotion on a face was a particularly attractive feature so I fail to see the appeal of botox .
That again helps to reduce unnecessary complexity in applying the definition and understanding of whether or not an individual is a Scottish taxpayer .
A bank is a repository for money .
An appraisal is a comparison of the home you are buying or refinancing to other homes in your neighborhood to determine what the exact market value of your home is not prime minus but east west bank personal loan .
I reckon that a camel is a horse designed by a committee in much the same way as a segway is a quadbike designed by a soulless git .
If a band is a little wonky , people will bash the artist for their amateurishness .
The idea is that I take a number of oscillators - a classic example of an oscillator is a pendulum - and study their motion when they work together , rather than independently .
New section 142 D to the 1983 Act , under the heading " Clinical supervisor " , was originally added to the Bill to stress that if a patient is a minor under 18 , the responsible clinician should be a child and adolescent mental health specialist .
Kidney : Obviously , an emergency is an instant admission to save somebody from committing suicide .
" A quetzal is an adorable bird .
The best time for a visit is the late afternoon - we left Garden Island at 3 pm and still had plenty of time to see everything .
But the theft of a child is a rare crime .
i can understand your pain , because a child is the most precious thing that can happen in your life .
However , a child can also go missing if you turn your back for one minute , and if the child is being watched a minute is all they need .
Reflecting brand and culture within a space is a way that design can underscore organizational support for innovation .
Most asteroids are spinning , and a way of stopping the spin would have to be devised , but Dr Genge added : " Engines are by far the best thing to use Copyright 2003 , The Guardian MODERATOR 'S NOTE : Why is it that Matt 's back-of-the-envelope-calculations look so nutty ( that is , apart from the nutty idea that driving an old banger into an asteroid is an option ) ?
One a month is a bit paltry when you have all those css showcase sites banging their beautiful-looking-but-ultimately-broken web sites in left , right and centre .
A habit is a pattern of action that we have learned - it can be good or bad .
Whether Huffington Post has ever actually turned a profit is a subject of great debate .
A traitor is a betrayer - one who practices injury , while professing friendship .
A ghost-writer is a hired writer who takes the data and creates the structure and arguments that will ultimately become the submitted paper - in other words , the author of the first draft .
Lies are lies , fraud is fraud , greed is greed , and a crime is a crime after all ... that is not over generalization ... it is actually a dire warning volley being shot across the bow of our society ... unfortunately ...
An aneurysm is an abnormal widening or ballooning of a portion of an artery due to weakness in the wall of the blood vessel .
The general political atmosphere in the country in the run-up to the much-awaited elections , the political stalemate in neighboring Guinea ( Conakry ) , reports on community violence in southwestern Cote d ' Ivoire , Ivorian-French bilateral relations , and the decision by workers of the customs services to embark on a strike are the other major news items .
Saying that an asteroid has a risk is a little like saying a burglar has a criminal record .
Deciphering whether a Work was a woodblock print ( par ma ) or manuscript ( bris ma ) , whether it was typeface or computer input , we began to collate these distinct sets .
A primate is a member of the mammalian order Primates , which comprises two suborders : the prosimians ( lemurs , lorises , and tarsiers ) and the anthropoids ( monkeys , apes , and man ) .
An arrhythmia is a disorder of the ( pulse ) or heart rhythm , such as beating too fast ( tachycardia ) , too slow ( bradycardia ) , or irregularly .
You know , one of the things about being tribal , being a member of a tribe is the force that makes you , that makes the tribe , for you to be like the tribe , to share similar values , to be less of an individual and more a very conscious member of a community to share political beliefs , to share cultural beliefs .
MUKASEY : The only signal for the conduct of such an investigation is the disclosure that activity that some people claim is illegal but is in fact the subject of an opinion , namely that it was legal for inclusion in the CIA interrogation program -- that 's the only signal for the opening of an investigation .
13 -702 Aggravating circumstances ; Bulletproof vests are legal but wearing one during commission of a felony is an aggravating circumstance that increases penalties ( SB 1047 , Ch 213 ) ; Add to Appendix D and Chap 5 .
A mudra is the hand gesture in Buddhist statuary .
The making of a king is an act of reason , and God hath given a man reason to rule himself ; and therefore hath given to a society an instinct of reason to appoint a governor over themselves ; but no act of reason goeth before man be created , therefore it is not in his power whether he be created a creature of greater power than a beast or no. 4 .
An ellipse is a closed curve , the intersection of a right circular cone and a plane that is not parallel to the base , the axis , or an element of the cone .
A resume is a marketing document for your career just as a brochure is a marketing document for a product or service .
Choosing of a king is either - a comparative crowning of this man , not that man ; and if the people have this it is a creating of a king under God , who principally disposeth of kings and kingdoms ; and this is enough for us .
An oath is a religious obligation , no arbitrary ceremony 3 .
A gordita is a fat girl , which is the type of woman many Mexican men hope to marry , as the stoutness is symbolic of health and fertility .
All I want to see from an actor is the intensity and accuracy of their listening .
The closest I came to an answer was that nitrous oxide emissions from fertilizer was about equal to animal-related methane on a CO 2 - equivalent basis ( in my country at least ) .
So how big of a problem is this ?
A blacklist is a database of known Internet addresses ( or IPs ) used by individuals or companies sending spam .
A litre is a measure of volume .
Remember , a litre is a measure of volume .
My own experience with hundreds of teachers has taught me that the personality of a teacher is a major and predominant factor in the success of students within that teacher 's influence .
I also did not want to spend on buying in queens ( I have never paid for bees so far - and wanted to keep my hives stocked from the established local strain(s) as much as possible - I recognise that a swarm is no absolute gaurantee of that but it 's cheap ) .
Genre : A genre is a particular type of literature , such as narratives , poetry , dramas , or fables .
Scaffolding : A scaffold is a supporting framework .
If a man is the cup - then the woman is the tea in the cup - tea is good in itself but must always take its shape from the cup into which it has been poured ...
[ at least a deer is an intelligent animal , and has it 's uses ] Do n't know if I could shoot one [ deer that is ] , and definitely disagree with hunting them for ' sport ' .
The reality is that a hospital is a miniature self contained town , it needs extra staff or these doctors can not do a damn thing .
I have often thought that if I wanted to murder someone and get away with it , a car is the perfect way to do it .
no where not born equal , and it sucks , but thats life ... equality has the same illusion as freedom , we all believe we have freedom of speech and such in our country , but we do n't really , same as we dont all have equality ... and thats just on the basis of our own country let alone the world ... and I do n't always let my emotions get in the way of asking or seeing obvious things about differences of races and such , but i 've gone through my own share of discrimination to see that its a horrible thing even at a basic level ... sure i realise theres differences between races and society 's , but theres a difference between recognising it and accepting it , and studying it and discussing it and eventually trying to find as many things as possible that makes it different from whatever race / religion / society your from :P I just participated in an interview with a 3rd year Physcology student about inter-sex and transvestite people and peoples attitudes / thoughts towards them and how much they understand their situations , it was actually rather difficult and confusing in some aspects as its not something you think of in great depth unless you 've been exposed to a friend / relitive / co-worker that inter-sex or such ... anyways , I can deal with facts if I need to , but as I said ... y ' know , black , white , pink , green , or techni-colour ... a person is a person to me , I dont even try to put people in catagories if I can help it ... cus the more you see the world the more you realise there aint anybody that fits into any catagory perfectly !
:) A cross-dresser is a part of cardio-vascular gym equipment ?
A tragedy is a tragedy , regardless of the numbers involved .
According to what I 've been hearing on the news today , the only machines that make a charge are those that are used less frequently than others .
A win and a draw is the kind of record pretty much any player or manager would settle for , but it must be the stuff of dreams for a young man whose two appearances have been for sides from the Conference and the Championship .
Greybeard , Of course castratation is n't going to stop a lout being a lout .
The best set I saw when I was a lad was a coal merchant that made and built his own stuff Had an 8 lane track in the loft on a hardboard / plywood base with copper tape either side of the slot for the pick up .
The " community " of which we are a part is the entire Church celebrating a common rite .
A monitor is a passive object that can be used to implement a server ; a client calls a method in the server to request a service ( the return value of the method is the server 's reply ) .
A process is an executing program .
A thread is an execution or flow of control in the address space of a process ; the program counter register points to the next instruction to be executed .
A process is a program with one thread .
A monitor is an object with some built-in mutual exclusion and thread-synchronization capabilities .
A bas-relief is a sculpted form which has areas that project but do not stand entirely free from the background , this plan describes how pariscraft can be used in sculpting reliefs .
Effective teaching as a craft is a creative endeavor and is largely a function of judgment and skill of the individual .
Purchasing a car is an overwhelming experience , but Patrick made the process pleasant and stress-free .
The Prophet said , " A Muslim is the one who avoids harming Muslims with his tongue and hands .
In any case , regarding FREE neutrons , we need to note that the spin of a proton is a VECTOR quantity , having both direction and magnitude .
Irretrievably gone as a result is a unifying worldview , be it religious or scientific , and what ensues is its fragmentation into incompatible value spheres .
" A computer is a device that can be used to magnify human productivity .
By asking ourselves a series of questions related to the idea of building a team we were able to make the determination if a team is a viable commodity in your community .
Let us not forget that a year is a long time in the Web industry .
But a tax consultant who publishes a magazine is an empres & aacute ; rio , even if it is a magazine about taxation .
Those days they were stuck together by fate , heading towards Tortuga to commadeer a crew were the most amusing , in his opinion .
For example , revealing that a whole season of Dallas was a dream was a retcon .
Being upside down in a kayak is a feeling of helplessness that few things can match .
Those regulations are intended to minimize the debt of students who drop out by requiring the return of loans before grants , since failure to complete a degree is a key predictor of default .
A bonus is the CD included with the book which contains tracks from some of the artists including a live version of the Electric Prunes ' I had Too Much to Dream Last Night and Some Things I Ca n't Forget by The Poets .
An illustration of such an equivalent is the family name of a school teacher , Cleary , from the book The Peter Principle .
More specifically , a symbol is a word , phrase , or other expression having a complex of associated meanings ; in this sense , a symbol is vied as having values different from those of whatever is being symbolized . .
Many poets have used the rose as a symbol of youth and beauty ( a flag is a piece of cloth which stands for or is a symbol of a nation " .
To them , the essence of a culture is the values , symbols , interpretations , and perspectives that distinguish one people from another in modern societies ( p .76 ) .
TT : A cat is a lion in catching mice / But a mouse in combat with a tiger .
To the north of the apadana , the Gate of All Nations ( # 4 ; also known as Xerxes ' Gate ) was built , which was guarded by a pair of large bulls in the west and lamassu 's in the east ( a lamassu is a bull with the head of a bearded man ) .
Janecka translates ( her main specialization as a translator is the area of IT services ) , designs , and maintains web pages and teaches English .
Where an offence is a fixed penalty offence and the council believe that such an offence has been committed , they are entitled to serve a fixed penalty notice on the alleged offender , entitling him to discharge liability by way of payment of a fixed penalty to the council .
Failing to do something however or in some way angering a person is a negative .
The touchscreen mini games work perfectly - hot wiring a car by rotating the screws and twisting the wires works as well here as it does with a stylus on the DS - but trying to aim and fire in a shootout is a clumsy , irritating process without physical buttons .
Title : Re : help Post by : calim on April 24 , 2012 , 10:21:5 3 AM thanks but he does like going in the shower so has one once a week is this enough or does he need more Title : Re : help Post by : hotfoot jackson on April 24 , 2012 , 12:10:5 5 PM Once a week is better than not at all ... no doubt her feather condition will improve with good care especially a good diet .
I thought a volley was a hard shot .
If using a luthier 's the best plan then that 's what I 'd have to do .
HeartStart Defibrillators Sudden Cardiac Arrest ( SCA ) affects millions of people worldwide each year and key to surviving such an episode is the speed with which initial treatment can be given .
If a payment is a disbursement in the VAT sense , the firm cannot recover the VAT charged by the supplier , the gross amount is shown on the invoice to the client and VAT is not added .
The guidance at EIM 33004 makes it clear that testing whether a period is an eligible period is a cumulative process .
" Providing a newsletter is a popular way to inform customers about new products and developments so consider including a sign up option ; again , test how easy it is for a user and do n't request too much information - a name and email address is sufficient .
Conquering a battleship is the only way you can get command of one .
Looking around this area at least once a day is a good idea as you 'll find pokemon , quests , and other events often .
I know there is a danger is this type of question to turn into a religion bashing thread so I 'm glad you posted that first warning bit .
A thread is a flow of control through a program with a single execution point .
A queue is a special thread-safe object that lets you put data in one end and take it out the other without having to worry about synchronization issues .
And as for camera pixel counts , do people REALLY still believe that the pixel count of a CCD is the most important criteria for buying a cameraphone ?
An example is the new Unplugged Styles .
We are motivated by a keen desire for praise , and the better a man is the more he is inspired by glory .
What comes to mind as an example is the famous J. Simpson 's trial , when his lawyer John Cochrane snapped in court that - " if the gloves ca n't fit , you cannot convict - you must acquit " .
Our client is an established UK company specialising in Network Management , Analysis and Security and recognised as a leader is this sector of the market .
An example is the purchase ... of 2 important Pugin domestic chairs for £ 2 -10 each .
They all grew out of it about a year later , but a year is an awfully long time for a little kid .
An example is the Official Doctor Who Club of Australia .
The hypothesis explicative for such a fact is the one according to which the subjects who turned up at FG have as main activity the administration of the Institutes and / or Faculties of the UFMT , which resulted in the production of a speech of an institutional character .
In fact , that is not quite correct , because if parliament says that for the purposes of the law a man is a woman and a woman is a man , then that is the case .
4.1 Developing a qualification is a complex business .
A carbuncle is an area of subcutaneous necrosis which discharges itself on to the surface through multiple sinuses .
" Pictures at an Exhibition is the opposite , making it a perfect composition to experiment with as Mussorgsky 's music is incredibly strong but also very open and experimental .
Thus , the circumstance that the Supreme Court subsequently ruled that evidence elicited at a police interview without legal advice was not Convention-compliant and therefore inadmissible against an accused is no basis for holding that the plea or the conviction which proceeded from it was vitiated .
While hiring a pro is a good idea , there are a few things you can do yourself .
Mar how soon can i refinance a mortgage is a question asked by many people how to have a home mortgage refinance loan for your bad credit .
One feature on the coastline that deserves a mention are the Balnearios which run the full length of the resort .
" A dog is the only thing on earth that loves you more than it loves himself " ...
So a church is a responsible family .
From Pittsburgh and originally rural PA , with love , I have to say watching fracking expand all around the places I love and live , a ban is the only way to fully protect yourselves from the risks to life , the environment , and property values .
But how optimistic a prognosis was the circuit judge to derive from Dr Byrne 's reports ?
First , the putting of questions by this court out of the blue at a hearing is an unsatisfactory way for it to receive further evidence even in the rare case in which such evidence is in principle fit for receipt .
The question of a prefix is a little unclear - the use of the ' degree ' symbol ( º ) is preferred to the written form ' degrees ' or ' Deg ' but is usually omitted if the context is clear .
" ( p 35 ) An example is the Pinus ponderosa Association of the Yellow Pine Series of the Rocky Mountain Conifer Forest .
Commitment to a person Commitment to a person is the most obvious one , because like , HELLO , we 're all thinking about LOVE all of the time .
To me the toughest part of being a director is the psychology part .
While the paramount needs to be addressed in a disaster are the protection of people in the disaster zone and the safety and health of the responders , disasters often provide the opportunity to conduct research on potential short - and long-term health effects among responders .
A flexagon is a polygon folded from paper with a very remarkable quality ; you can turn it inside out to make it reveal hidden surfaces .
A focus is an object or action tied closely to the Passion aura of the target .
Bolten , the White House budget director whose idea of a conversation-starter is a book entitled Walter the Farting Dog on his office coffee table , had crafted campaign policy for the president and served as deputy chief of staff before becoming director of the Office of Management and Budget in June 2003 .
Steve , that 's because the people who keep getting themselves elected in this town could give a rat 's a * * about it or the people in it .
The White House move appears designed to blunt that impact of the Supreme Court 's decision , as any determination that a suspect is an illegal alien would have nominal impact if the state was banned from providing any penalty and the White House refused to do so .
To the GOP , anyone who is not a millionaire is the enemy .
I think the semantic support would be key to being able to map to formats like NLM XML - eg how do you say that a section is a ' methodology ' in a portable way ?
A regulation is a principle designed to control behavior .
" The front door of a restaurant is a looking glass , and on the other side lies the promise of a better life , " he wrote in a 2012 Lucky Peach article .
Writing a script for a computer is quite different than writing a script for a human - this sort of naive " a script is a script " equivalence just wo n't do .
Trying to connect with a pixelated character on a screen is a rather hard task , and the act of " trying " to connect because of this barrier seems to go against true feelings , because it 's forced , and thus I do n't really find any kind of deep meaning there .
And a tent is a nice place for privacy .
And the last thing one wants on a journey is a sulking car .
Because rooted in a standard is the expectation of replication , o loss of individuality , of mass production for mass consumption by the masses of consumers .
He wanted to reward a season of hard work and show that such an attribute is a necessity .
Because this is so , we believe that a lawyer is a necessary participant at the closing to direct the proper transfer of title and consideration and to document the transaction , thereby protecting the private legal interests at stake as well as the public interest in the continued integrity and reliability of the real property recording and registration systems .
Miles later revealed that the message about a sister was a pre-arranged code-phrase , meaning the information communicated was done so under duress , and Naomi , in fact , had no sister .
Having a child is an important decision for any person or couple .
Moreover , if the only measure of the quality of a strategy is the amount of fuss its opponents raise , perhaps we should just give up the fight for rights completely .
" A person is a person right from conception .
Looby said she is offended by people who imply that an abortion is a rash decision .
Also , since a trust is a " business entity " as that phrase is defined in the Georgia Ethics in Government Act , information regarding the existence of the " blind trust " itself must be disclosed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-5-50 ( b ) ( 3 ) if the public officer has a direct ownership interest in the trust above the statutory threshold amounts .
Georgia courts have noted that the beneficiary of a trust is the equitable owner of the trust property .
Indeed , other jurisdictions have noted that the receipt of income by a beneficiary is a beneficial use .
The idea of handing over a pair of undies ( even if freshly laundered ) to a workmate is a pretty horrifying prospect .
And the charge that an opposition is ' politicising ' such an event is a hardy perennial .
It was too closed to things that were happening ( especially in literature ! ) , I thought that having a publishing house , a literary magazine , even a bookstore was a better idea - but I do not have a commercial spirit and I would have sunk .
An example is the theory for ring-module pairs , which may be regarded as a two-sorted theory in which one sort is interpreted as a ring and the other as a module over that ring .
An example is the theory of suplattices , where we have , for every cardinal number nn , an operation to take the supremum of nn elements .
Ct 965 , ' as to whether a railroad is a public highway , established primarily for the convenience of the people , and to subserve public ends , and therefore subject to governmental control and regulation .
Ct 282 , it was adjudged that embraced within the police powers of a state was the establishment , maintenance , and control of public highways , and that , under such powers , reasonable regulations incident to the right to establish and maintain such highways could be established by the state .
This is constructive fraud , and it is usually inferred when a party is a fiduciary and has a duty to know of , and disclose , particular facts .
The " victim " in such a fraud is the U.S. government .
The day when marking comment spam gives you a thrill is the day your blog traffic spike is history and you can sing the After Digg Blues with me .
A mashup is a web page or application that uses or combines data or functionality from two or many more external sources to create a new service .
If you know if an address is a single residence or a multiple residence ( like a nursing home or campus ) this information is used to settle a confidence of an individual or household duplicate .
It sounds strange , but ad-libbing without a script is both easier and harder in developing your broadcast voice than reading printed copy .
The quantum efficiency of a photocathode is the number of photoelectrons per incident photon .
The quantum efficiency of a photocathode is the average number of photoelectrons per quantum absorbed .
A pathname is the route you take along the branches of the tree to get to the directory you want .
Finding that a law restricting marriage to a man and a woman was a sex classification comparable to the already declared unconstitutional ban on interracial marriage , the Hawaii court concluded the law was subject to " strict scrutiny , " meaning it could not be upheld absent a compelling state interest .
" A box is a box .
This image of a Christian reveling in the presence of a confessor is a familiar one in church history .
A mentor is a synonym for teacher , guide , or counselor .
A supernova is a fantastically energetic explosion at the end of the life of a very massive star .
There is an elitist view amongst some that if you do n't reside with a certain distance of the ground , then your entire existence as a supporter is a fallacy .
Henry says that cutting overseas students by a third is a success .
If they find an individual is no real threat to their agenda , then the wrecker will move on to target another individual the wrecker thinks is more of a threat to ZOG - then the whispering campaign of " grass " etc begins anew .
A gene is a certain segment of DNA which , when working in conjunction with other genes , brings about the code for a specific characteristic , for example eye colour or size .
A number of key themes emerged , one in particular to do with the aims and content of ab initio courses ; and an outcome was the formation of a representative working group to consider this issue , which is likely to concern all UCD 's more and more over the years ahead .
The result of such a quest is a society filled with disposable goods and disposable people .
The one thing better than cruising on a chopper is the satisfaction of having built it from the ground up .
One of the most important operational considerations to look for in a skimmer is the size of the bubbles the skimmer uses .
Losing 1 or 2 pounds a week is an easier proposition .
A sequence is a schema object that can generate unique sequential values .
Their next distraction is in the Land of Giants where , once again , they are captured and the decision is that a land where even a lowly hen can peck at you as if you were a worm is an extremely undesirable place .
A situation of this kind arises , where both the opposite attributes belong alike : for then there is general support for the view that one must agree absolutely to the assertion of both , or of neither : e.g. if a thing is half white and half black , is it white or black ?
For when rhetoricians wish to show that a man is an adulterer , they take hold of some consequence of an adulterous life , viz. that the man is smartly dressed , or that he is observed to wander about at night .
For the same definition ought to hold good of ' refutation ' too , except that a mention of ' the contradictory ' is here added : for a refutation is a proof of the contradictory .
For a proposition is a single statement about a single thing .
If , then , a proposition is a single statement about a single thing , it is obvious that this fallacy too consists in ignorance of what a refutation is : for in it what is not a proposition appears to be one .
For a refutation is the proof of the contradictory of a given thesis , so that either one or two proofs of the contradictory constitute a refutation .
It is , too , altogether absurd to discuss Refutation without first discussing Proof : for a refutation is a proof , so that one ought to discuss proof as well before describing false refutation : for a refutation of that kind is a merely apparent proof of the contradictory of a thesis .
A decade is a long way off , and we make recommendations for 2005 as a crucial intermediate target year , with significant improvements by then .
The person I would most like to be for a day is a miracle worker and I would love to meet the Dalai Lama .
It expresses what many HCI workers assume , that just as it is clear what a " user " is ( distinct users can be identified by their bodies - if it is the same person then it is the same user ) , so a task is the same thing to all people in all circumstances .
Being a fish is a fine way to escape , looks gone anyhow , that gold comb and matching mirror dashed in a fit of rancour .
The Kaffir sees better in the dark than a white man , and a knobkerrie or an axe is a better weapon in a blind scrap than a gun .
A rematch is the only way Creed can prove to the world that he 's still the one true undefeated champion .
Marce said getting a job was a lot easier than he expected .
civil liberty , and was in some respects analogous to the habeas corpus act in the English law ; but the appointment of a dictator was a suspension of the law .
which simply means that the ratio of the perimeter to a side is a shape property and has the same value for all similar figures of the same shape regardless of their size .
At birth the average weight of a baby is a little over 7 lb and the length about 20 in .
" To this we answered , " A class is a large class when it is bigger that you anticipated , or bigger than you are used to teaching .
A banjo is a family heirloom .
A listserv is a network-based discussion group devoted to a single topic .
The credibility of a witness is the less as the atrociousness of the crime is greater , from the improbability of its having been committed ; as in cases of witchcraft , and acts of wanton cruelty .
SD : A guru is a teacher and a guide .
R$ 3 -4 an hour is an OK price in tourist areas -- any more is too much .
A martyr is either one who suffers at the hands of the enemies of Islam , often to the point of death , because of his or her faith , not politics , or someone who falls in a battle against aggressors .
In the background of Vuillard 's portrait we see a literal reflection of that youth -- glimpsed in a mirror is another portrait of Duret , painted many decades before by the American James McNeill Whistler .
A library is a gymnasium for the imagination .
" The most important part of a pedicure is the preparation , " Iris explains .
Anybody who takes their eyes off the road to read or write a text is an idiot , Definately a ban and immeditate confiscation of the mobile phone by attending officer .
Attending a community or school event or even a tradeshow is a wonderful opportunity but one that you should not embark on empty handed because people love to come to these events for the wonderful goodies that businesses offer .
An injunction is both i ) an interim remedy and ii ) a permanent remedy .
The end of an age is the end of a progression of the sun through the zodiac .
Hi , really pleased for you , sometimes a hug is the best medicine .
" It 's a bitter pill for someone who as a child was a self-confessed telly addict .
The furniture has been scraped , we have been scraped and to take her for a walk was an absolute nightmare last night .
In essence a pattern is an outline of ' what works ' based on observation of practice .
Kaye and Ruth decided that a run-off of a recall was the fairest way to decide on the winner .
In Web-speak , a cookie is a simple text file that stores information about websites you 've visited .
a suspension failure because of a kerb is a rare thing and it happened twice for Massa , so he clearly was doing something wrong !
A win is a win , but once again we looked dodgy .
Furthermore , if we are talking about its female contributors , I do n't believe that criticising an opinion , or an article is the same as criticising a personal life choice .
It was undoubtedly a foul and a penalty was the correct decision .
A penalty is a fair reward to the fouled striker , unless he is pulled back deliberately when clear of the defender .
I hope the Global south does take a hard line - anything which leads to a split is the best way forward .
Running such an engine is a very fun experience : you have to add water , coal , check pressure , oil , all at the same time while actually running around a track with others and passengers .
Using a low salary as an excuse is a slur on all those who do n't earn large amounts but would never think of stealing .
The problem with lobbing smart ammunition out of a railgun is the massive EMF pulse of the firing would brick the smart bits in the missile faster than an Apple iBone update .
They 'll never settle for a draw or come out saying a draw is a good point as the opposition are a good side .
For me a wedding is a public confession of a pre-existing sacrament between two people and should reflect how they wish to continue living their lives together .
It 's hard to imagine a situation where the proper way for a political aide to exit a conversation is a with a cheerful " fuckitty-bye !
What has made that almost a certainty was the US giving political asylum to Emilio Palacio ( uriblank ) .
A light-year is the dis­tance light trav­els in a year .
In circumstances when there is a suspicion that a child is an eligible individual , the AEA or AEA in collaboration with the LEA shall conduct a full and individual initial evaluation .
One exception to the warrant requirement for a search is the administrative search doctrine .
The desire to shave four cents from the assembly of a product is an obstruction to building it the right way .
Perhaps the legacy of Steve Jobs as a leader is a call for clarity .
One might think that an animal lover would love a pet , but a pet is a huge responsibility and there are many considerations that go into choosing the right animal .
Gone are the days when marriages were executed by parents ; The times when a Punjabi marrying a Punjabi or a Bengali marrying a Bengali was the norm .
Kaal : > > > > Let even a slightest lewd sight , remark or gesture towards a woman be the ...
Traveling from one area to another or making a quick getaway on a horse is the way to go .
On the other hand , the aggregate of staff costs to the meetings budget over the course of a year is a much firmer number .
( An example is the president 's symposium at an annual meeting .
The Supreme Court ruled that under federal law , an employee is a supervisor for purposes of vicarious liability only if the employee is " empowered by the employer to take tangible employment actions against the victim .
The U.S. Supreme Court said no. Under Title VII , an employer can be sued for vicarious liability only if an employee is a supervisor who is " empowered by the employer to take tangible employment actions against the victim .
" We 've reached a stage where a person is a hero by how he can break the law .
My question here is that since I think the key is G major , should n't the A chord be a minor chord , since the ii chord in G major would be A minor ?
Therefore , methods to describe when a prediction is an interpolation or an extrapolation should be useful in prospectively determining prediction validity .
A tracheostomy is a surgically created opening in the trachea .
IGEM more than a competition is a life experience ; it involves you at all , sometimes it is hard sometimes funny but above all it is by far the best experience which a student could done during his undergraduate studies .
A planula is a tiny oval structure whose outer layer is lined with minute hairs called cilia .
A ) A lick is a short , formulaic phrase generally used in improvised solos .
But all this stuff about five complaints to a mod is a bit off .
A maven is a trusted expert in a particular field , who seeks to pass knowledge on to others .
A toothache is any pain or soreness within or around a tooth or the jaw .
Instead of linking you to a million lessons , I 've brought the lessons to you : A Quick Glance at Modes An interval is the distance between any of those notes .
" Today , having a computer is a necessity , because without it , life will leave you behind !
Demonizing the people 's government in a democracy is a rather odd way to show one 's commitment to democracy .
His only reference to a boycott was a description of actions undertaken by others that he has always opposed .
uisdigit - Tells if a character is a digit .
We are further of the opinion that a person convicted of a fourth or subsequent violation of KRS 189 A .010 is not eligible for home incarceration , since such a conviction is a felony under KRS 189 A .010 ( 4 ) and since KRS 532.210 ( 1 ) does not permit a felon to be sentenced to home incarceration .
Being a bit mean , it 's flaky , you do n't need to , you are n't an artist are the kinds of things I told myself when I thought about writing my statement in the beginning .
i ahve a question is this actually gunna happen because i am terrified im only 21 and i wanna have a family ??
The default in a crisis is the Emergency Department , which has implications for wait times .
a kunai is a ninja weapon .
A patch is a file ( typically a fasl -- compiled Lisp -- file ) which either corrects some error in the product or provides some enhancement or new feature .
Once upon a time , in a land and time far , far away , there was a job market where competition was friendly and relaxed , and all that you needed to land a job was a nice smile , a cleanly pressed shirt , and a simply undecorated printed presentation of your credentials .
On free trade , Will ( needless to say ) agreed with Martinez and said that the more prosperous a country is the less chance their citizens will try to come here .
The general rule concerning the penalty for such an act is that theft by deception is a class A misdemeanor .
One of the hallmarks of a professional is the ability to keep healthy - physically , emotionally and spiritually .
By definition , a democracy is a state of all its citizens , and cannot favor one ethnicity , religion or any other social group over another ; if it does , it is not a democracy .
An example is the co-occurrence of eight endemic plant taxa with populations from New York to South Carolina , across a large disjunction in which northern and southern populations are separated by > 300 kilometers .
A theme that keeps popping up for me as a reader is the problem of balancing completeness with making things accessible to a lay audience .
The court also said in that opinion that " the right of the public to be informed transcends any loss of efficiency " - which we take to mean that expense or inconvenience is not a relevant consideration in determining whether an entity is a public agency .
A governing board creates a committee , and the committee creates a subcommittee ; because a committee is a public agency , the subcommittee becomes a committee of a public agency and thus is itself a public agency .
The content of a eulogy is a function of the life being eulogized .
Continue reading " The content of a eulogy is a function of the life being eulogized .
After all , if the need for a trial is an absolute , then it would apply even in the most absurd situations .
In the cases where corporate interests are stake , no one proposes a soft non-binding solution - a treaty is the only option under consideration .
A highlight was the wonderful Leonardo flying machine .
" Al Qaeda became an ideology , " he says , and " what effected this transformation from an armed group into an ideology is the United States .
The exoskeleton of an arthropod is a hard external structure made of chitin that protects the arthropod , prevents dessication and provides structural support .
An iPad is a tablet .
Naming a baby is a very personal decision , and while I find Spanish names more beautiful , that 's my personal opinion .
Such an act is a " present " service for which an emolument is paid , not a past service for which a gratuity is given .
The ability to think like a human is an arbitrary criterion for rights .
I have a policy of not leaving comments on a blog , as it 's a medium were no one can win .
Studies show that when a person is a recipient of a kind act , seretonin ( the neurotransmitter that promotes a good feeling in the brain ) is stimulated and the immune system strengthens .
A swab is a small piece of absorbent material , such as gauze or cotton , attached to the end of a stick or wire .
A plinth is the piece of trim which runs along the bottom edge of the cabinets in order to hide the feet and to give the kitchen clean lines .
Currently gambling activities are envisaged - an example is a live game of cards where you see your set of cards on the mobile phone together with video of the game .
8 To sum up : be one in thought and feeling , all of you ; be full of brotherly affection , kindly and humble-minded 9 Do not repay wrong with wrong , or abuse with abuse ; on the contrary , retaliate with blessing , for a blessing is the inheritance to which you yourselves have been called 10 [ Ps .43.12 -16 .
The Games saw the leaders working with the primary school children who took part in multiskills ; they develop a child 's all round skills , the fundamentals , thus not limiting them to a specific sport .
A class is a template for creating a particular form of object .
A field is a " container " that holds a value .
A method is an operation on the fields of the object and any values that are passed as arguments to the method .
An applet is a piece of java that can be run inside a java-enabled browser .
There is an old saw about an optimist being a soul whose cup is always half full , while a pessimist will always see it as half empty .
Tendon A tendon is a white fibrous cord that joins bones to muscle .
In many cases , confirming a diagnosis is a long process that can often take several years .
An incision is a cut in the skin , enabling the body to be opened .
There 's an unpleasant suggestion of misogyny hanging over " Blues In The Night " ( even if it was his mama who done told him about how a woman 's a two-face ) , and the acoustic guitar that opens " Guess I 'll Hang My Tears Out To Dry " offers only the briefest ray of sunshine in this otherwise overcast day .
' A magneto is a cylindrical device which comprises many windings of copper wire .
A spirometer is a machine that measures how much oxygen you can breathe in , and how much carbon dioxide you can breathe out .
I thought that a bishop is the focus of unity within a diocese .
The symptoms of episodic ataxia usually begin when a person is a teenager .
A Greyhound is a traditional heraldic device associated with the Tudors .
A telomere is a region of repetitive DNA at the end of chromosomes , which protects the end of the chromosome from destruction ...
A zone is a plane in reciprocal space passing through the origin .
" A cop 's a cop , " he coldly declared when challenged by a friend that police officers did not deserve to ...
I would like to say that business plan of an organization is a core issue without business plan how oranization , will , grow up so in my opinion business plan of an organization play a vital role for the attainment of organizational objective and goals .
While everything inside a TV is important , the three main aspects that are more or less the prime factors in completely deciding the quality of a TV are the video and the audio performances of the TV and the connectivity of it as well .
A bicycle is a brilliant load-carrying platform .
As you point out in your logo example , when an image is the only thing within a link and there is no or empty alt , a screen reader has nothing to convey for an element that has functionality .
Looking at the purpose or the function of an image is a good place to start , as long as we stay open to the idea that the purpose of an image can change from one person to the next .
An enzyme is a catalyst - it causes a chemical reaction to take place without , itself , becoming part of that chemical reaction .
A fascia is a connective tissue that surrounds muscles , groups of muscles , blood vessels , and nerves , binding those structures together like plastic sandwich wraps .
" I 'm not in favour of compulsion because wearing a helmet is a matter of personal choice but I think children should be made to wear them .
On a table is a nasty-looking knife .
( A string is an operand for only one operation code , the print routine . ) Following the operation-code byte are the operands .
With ZIP needs to know to start running a game are the first address of the three parts of the address space ; the first address of Thing storage , global-variable storage , and the vocabulary table used by the " input " Z-code instruction ( whence it can find the number and size of vocabulary entries ) ; and the address of the first executable instruction in the game .
The auction did and still does attract gipsies , Romanies , travelers , and tinkers , as , among other ' trades ' , they would have also been horse-dealers , especially in the old days when a horse was a valuable commodity .
ABOUT LED 's A diode is a two wire component that only passes current when the voltage is applied correctly across it .
A router is a noisy and very messy device producing lots of dust .
So the gut instinct that an investor feels when meeting an entrepreneur is a kind of data analysis .
The , beast like a bear was the Persian empire , and its three ribs were the kingdoms of Sardis , Babylon , and Egypt .
As Prince Charles has said : " The experience and skills which people build up over a lifetime are an invaluable resource .
Too often getting an animal is an emotional spur of the moment decision and it is the new pet that ends up paying the price .
Of course the job of a huntsman is a little more complex than that , but essentially the hounds just follow their noses .
Also a fox is an indiscriminate killer who kills just because it is inborn -- On my smallholding there are 100 's of rabbits yet they would rather destroy sitting (literally)ducks , chicken and chicks , not just for food but for the hell of it !
We were surprised to find air conditioning was available , although thought the cost of 6 Euros a day was a bit steep .
and to raise awareness around the world that this child is missing , we seldom here of children going missing and maddie is no different to the hundreds of children who go missing every day across the world that never reach the papers or media , a child is a child .
All I want is for it to be diagnosed , whether I have an operation is another matter .
Where there is no limit on the liability of the company 's members , a company is an " unlimited company .
Just because a person is a deaf signer it does n't follow that they have a level of expertise sufficient to allow them to interpret to professional standards .
I could say deaf friends but to me a friend is a friend be they hearing , deaf , black ... we 're all people the same regarless of colour , culture whatever .
A friend is a " communicator " , she is BSL fluent , trained to a high level , lipspeaker and teaches BSL / deaf awareness .
when has a kezzy been a hawk :confused: I would say it 's a hawk , if a peregrine is a hawk as in gamehawk then a kessie could be too .
A falcon is a hawk .
A car is a car if it 's a Nissan or a Ford its still a car .
For what Alonso could be slammed a bit is the way he forced Raikkonen behind : earlier they were wheel-to-wheel , and Alonso obviously did not let a car width between himself and the edge of the track , else Raikkonen would not have backed off .
" After the next 45 , I think a draw was a fair result .
Once a finding is a given which was necessary for the disposal of the appeal the second proviso to section 34 ( 3 ) of the Act would be attracted and the bar of limitation would be lifted .
And other gay or bisexual characters like Mike , Scott , and even Bob , are presented with many , and complex , psychological layers to their natures : the hallmark of a stereotype is a cruelly simplistic one-dimensional portrayal - and I do not believe that Van Sant , whose work is marked by its love of humanity , can be accused of that .
We might argue , then , that the amount of effort expended in creating an artwork is a reliable yardstick for measuring its quality .
So , in ascertaining the value of Grisham 's artifact , one might begin by asking , What kind of an artifact is The Pelican Brief ?
( Of course , finding ways to put two naked ladies on top of each other in interesting positions WITHOUT showing a cooter or a nipple is a whole nother puzzle .
Basically , a thought is a logical picture of a fact .
Death in a game is a fail state , a set of parameters that completely reset progression or otherwise punish the player .
A constituent is a syntactic unit : a single word , or a phrase or clause consisting of one or more words that belong together and act as a unit syntactically .
Resigning a match is a tacit admission of defeat , one would think .
Recall that a control is a vector of length 100 with entries in { 0 , 1 } .
Watching all this from a ledge is a skinny kid with a natural Mohawk and what looks like shaving cream on his head and his face made up raccoon-like , i.e. blackened eyes and whitened face .
To give a little background in redshift and cosmology , a redshift is an increase in the wavelength of the light .
You know how to write good Java code and deployment to a server is no mystery either .
In English , Robert Recorde in the 1558 edition of the Ground of Artes wrote , " A diget is any numbre vnder 10 .
A selection is a block of text marked for further manipulation .
Now a day 's a week rarely goes by when I 'm not offered an " exclusive " offer , courtesy of UKBT to join the best tipping service on the ' net , obviously at a cost .
He said : " The birthplace is the single most important building from Dylan 's lifetime and we felt that a statue was a fitting tribute to the area that shaped his future work , particularly as we found a sculptor with a massive reputation and similar views and ideals .
I would not approve a family where a member is a heavy indoor smoker .
For some people a business is a lot more than choosing a name that was formed from 2 characters in a popular US legal drama !
Thanks for the comments , and the ASUS look really nifty , but I then wondered when I would actually remove the keyboard and use it as a tablet , and could n't think of an occasion , which solves my dilemma really , a netbook is the solution for me .
A society is a grouping of decided which is pictures by common interests and may have always .
A tablet is a nice addition to a graphic designers tool set but I believe its not essential .
The familiar Quartet in A minor is a work of Walton 's maturity , more compact in form , conservative in language , and relaxed in tone .
A burgee is the House Flag of a club .
It is not about dividing it up , a scrounger is a scrounger a thief is a thief irrespective of what walk of life they come from , so why target the poorest first , I suspect because they cannot afford the fancy barristers to represent them .
A job is a job , and I am sure the person picking up their pay packet at the end of the week / month is not going to stop and question who pays their wages - lets just get some jobs so more people are able to do that .
For a child , a story is an inviting signal from further along the road ; it satisfies immediate needs and predictive interests .
Can a poem be a classic ?
Also somewhat of a privilege is the presence of the Save the Elephants non-profit organisation on-site .
Such a time was the Hyborean Age .
Such a tale is the story of Conan The Barbarian .
A capon is a castrated rooster .
At the center of a home is the all-purpose main hall where the family rests , eats , and receives guests , and that contains the family altars , ancestral tablets , and god .
As cordial as Taiwanese can be in a personal setting , on the street with strangers , it is a free-for-all ; one fights for every inch of space on the streets of Taipei , and holding one 's place in a line is a contest .
I wholeheartedly agree that giving individuals choice about how to spend a budget is a great idea in principle , I just worry that the overall amount of the Government 's spending in this area could lead to budgets that would be too small to really help anyone .
A quest is a cruel migration .
" Inside the shop near the back where it opens onto a passageway is a staircase to the second level of the shop .
Second , the only operative parts of a patent are the claims - not the drawings , and not the description , which are technically known as the " specification .
If you come to me furiously waving the damaged cutting board , and I say , " I did n't mean to wreck it ; I just needed something to cut the onion on , " your fury may not abate , but in an important way you and I will be on the same page : neither of us will think that setting out to dice up an onion was an inherently bad thing to do .
There will be no membership , everyone who owns a blog is a potential participant and contributor .
A crow is a kind of bird , it is black and large , it makes an annoying " caw " sound ( it does not sing , as much as the fox in the story would like the crow to believe so ) .
If you 've found a bug , creating a ticket is the best way to report it .
Capitalism will never resolve its " contradictions " ; and a crisis is the point at which these " contradictions " come to a head .
While the management and engineers of a company are the most important groups to keep educated on patents , other groups of people associated with the intellectual property of the company e.g. technicians , sales staff ) need to be educated also .
A gat was a pivotal social statement for Korean men throughout history , as well as a rare fashion accessory .
For a start , if you are going to do linkbait then a blog is a natural place to put it .
I still think being a landlord is the way to go , it 's stodgy but it 's steady income .
A fractal is a fragmented geometric shape that can be split into parts , each of which is ( at least approximately ) a reduced-size copy of the whole .
While Tunberg had felt that the casting of Capucine as a Eurasian was a crucial misstep , her saintly performance grounds the second half of the film when it becomes a race to save her character 's life .
A corporation is a legal construction that limits the owners ' liability .
Both the IPO and M & A market were a bit slower in 3 Q 11 compared to the first half of the year .
Sharing your reactions and interpretations of a book is a necessary part of reading .
Managing a business is a daunting task , particularly in these times of crises .
Working out on a budget is a good thing to do in order that you can make more money than you spend .
An illusion is the only thing that can be offered .
Words are only painted fire ; a look is the fire itself .
An endowment is a fund that holds its principal in perpetuity and only pays out a small portion , about 4 to 5 percent per year , that goes to campus operations and programs .
They are subjective and anecdotal ( for example is not proof , and proof is merely a matter of persuasion ) , not objective and empirical - just opinions and an opinion is a belief .
Having a website is another valuable tool .
Just buying " free-roaming organic " eggs at a supermarket is no guarantee of animal 's health .
A peasant with a pheasant was a poacher .
Rather , ratification of a convention is a positive statement by the executive government of this country to the world and to the Australian people that the executive government and its agencies will act in accordance with the Convention .
Building a mill was a costly investment and the lord , the only one with enough money to finance it , wanted to see a worthwhile return on his money .
The most valuable building on a manor was the water mill .
The menu is extensive but the main events are the steaks whose names are translated into English , although you may not recognise some of the cuts - a lomo is a melt-in-the-mouth tenderloin , whilst bife de chorizo is n't a spicy sausage but a prized , tasty cut of meat .
A battery is a criminal offence .
" A battery is any act by which D , intentionally or recklessly , inflicts unlawful personal violence upon V .
While it did appear to support his contention I expressed concern at the hearing at the reference in that report to the suggestion that the sentencing of a prisoner by a judge was a " fiction " .
For example if a child is injured in a road traffic accident and a parent was the driver of the vehicle , that parent may not be able to act as litigation friend for the child , as they clearly have an interest in the claim .
Part II of Schedule 3 provides that the Secretary of State may submit any information relating to the likelihood of an applicant being a danger to the public if released immediately .
Whether the application is for a declaration or to revoke a declaration the Commissioners are still considering the question whether such a prisoner is a danger to the public .
A window is a widget that is n't visually the child of any other widget and that usually has a frame and a window title .
Often , an anime is a condensed but basically faithful re-telling of the manga on which its based with an ending made up for it , but FLCL is not .
The Petitioner 's costs , post Legal Aid were approximately £ 40,000 and therefore we would have a situation were the Respondent would be left with £ 320,000 plus her own modest assets and the Petitioner would be left with assets in excess of £ 1.5 million .
Toplady 's reply was : ' I have often wondered if my terror of riding on a horse is the God-ordained means of preserving my life .
The European Court of Human Rights has rightly stressed ( see P , C and S v United Kingdom ( 2002 ) 35 EHRR 31 , [ 2002 ] 2 FLR 631 , at paras 116 , 131 , 133 ) that such an order is a ' draconian ' and ' extremely harsh ' measure , requiring ' exceptional justification ' and ' extraordinarily compelling reasons ' .
If a product is a ' total ' it will kill nearly all green vegetation , if it is ' selective ' it will kill specific weeds and not others .
A huisarts is a family doctor and you need to register with one convenient for you .
If this is a problem , one solution I have used with a client is a beeper that is set to beep every 20 seconds or so .
There is also a price-cutting is a strategy that Tesco should be able to win customers back .
This match was even closer , and a draw was a fair result .
the opposite of a space is the " ~ " character .
Not sure what you mean by - the opposite of a space is the " ~ " , however StrComp with textCompare certainly does recognize the " ~ " , indeed in this range same as Excel 's compare order ( which is not entirely the same as VB 's ) .
the opposite of a space is the " ~ " > character .
Name = " Col _ 14 " End With End Sub You will be prompted to save the workbook when closing because naming a range is a change to the workbook and you want to save the defined name .
It means officials would know where an offender is every minute of the day unlike current tagging schemes that only confirm if someone is at a designated address during a curfew .
The citizenry do not get to vote on whether a whale is a mammal or a fish , or on the temperature at which water boils , and legislatures cannot repeal the laws of nature .
There is over US $ 21,000 worth of prizes , with the first prize including two NVIDIA Quadro FX 5500 cards , and a week 's all inclusive holiday .
Because fitting or replacing a bathroom is a very large job I have posted links to the relevant pages that you require in order to complete the project .
Being a student is the best time to explore all London has to offer , with discounts available on just about everything from travel to theatre tickets , and from music events to selected shops .
Remnant Imprint , Phantom Core , Soul , Wholeness Navigator , Sovereign Integral ... the only component of the Entity , with a form is the Human Instrument ...
Do n't forget also , that the £ 25 - or-so a year is the starting amount .
So a reasonable approach in constructing an abstract is a statement of the topic or area , a summary of the main points ( you could even begin with stringing together the section titles ) , and a summary of your conclusion .
" While our membership believes a university degree still has a very high currency with employers and a significant effect on a person 's earning potential over a lifetime , students should n't be pressured and rush into a decision during clearing , but take a step back and think about whether going to university and studying for a degree is the right path for them .
I like webcam caches , but at the end of the day , a geocache is a physical container with a logbook and a pencil , IMO .
The permabag controls humidity and maintains the perfect condition for storage at the minimum cost , I am biased as I do business with Permabag and supply its products but the diadvantages with a dehumidifyer are the ongoing costs and it is difficult to maintain a constant humidity in a garage for example .
My concern is whether a smoothie is the best draught in the first place ...
Completely unfit for purpose from a reliability and security perspective , and we now have a new generation that thinks re-booting your PC two or three times a week is a natural part of computing ( I have a Linux server that was last re-booted around Easter 2010 ) .
Something else that is a hazard is the weed .
In some cases , the Oracle Streams Performance Advisor cannot determine whether a component is a bottleneck component .
A journey is a linear narrative .
A stoma is an artificial opening between an organ and the skins surface , formed by surgery .
One of the critical performance issues of an appliance is the reliance on the quality of hydrocolloid materials used .
Now , erm , that 's good , that 's good reporting quite right about it and just to remind people it was when Steve said , the only erm , err , bird that has n't got a penis is the swan and I went on about the male bird being called a cock , but I could n't use that to mean a you know .
But to call us the junior to our American cousins referring to a point where they were yet to get into the action for pretty much a year is a massive oversight for the PM .
Hi Nik - Sorry I havent posted to you for a while been a bit pre-occupied .
Truth in a relationship is a great boon and marriage can be a big healer of this problem if there is truth and love between you .
Martha Cover : If each of the 39 areas is simply not permitted to have more than , for instance , one director , a deputy and two or three administrative staff , and the consortium is run on the basis that it is a hub-that is another word that people have used-you will have 40 or 50 professional practitioners working in that group that can cover that range of functions within that area .
Baby P set us in front of an avalanche-there is no other way to describe it-of cases which we had to get control of if we were going to deliver a service to the children .
I had my problems too though , not having had love as a child being an orphan etc. We both needed sorting out .
A fuse is a one-time disconnect device whereas a circuit breaker has a life of many disconnects and can even be used as an ON / OFF switch in some cases .
85 Stanilic Agree with your comments whole heartedly , we have developed a society were the young " qualified graduates " get dropped into jobs were they are completely out of there depth .
A rebate is a commission in the chain whichever way you look at it .
I had been told that wind noise on a motorcycle was a cause of hearing loss , even at relatively low speeds , but had not taken much notice .
Perhaps Geoffrey would like to tell us what IS evidence of an area being an accident blackspot !
Assessing their competence by the velocity with which they pass a fixed point on a road is a nonsense .
Someone else who deserves a medal is the business presenter who originally interviewed him , Karen Bowerman .
A draw was a fair result .
Instead of asking her outright for if she wants a divorce be a little less ' black and white ' .
In the era before germ theory such a result was all too common .
RDR has aleady failed , the FSA and FCA do n't know it yet , the consumer benefits will not arise nor will it increase professionalism , as a professional is a person who performs their task with skill , care and diligence for the benefit of the client , some of the cleverest fraudsters are usually the most highly qualified .
On inspection and Xray the radius and ulna were broken by shotgun pellets mid bone so a pin was the order of the day .
Whether or not he did do such a thing is another story .
I did not know being a communist was a crime ?
Seek shade , not sun - A tan is a sign of skin damage !
Factors that cause cancer Diet and speed of growth as a child are both significant causes of cancer , but many Americans still incorrectly believe that factors such as pesticides or pollution are bigger causes .
A cancer is a cell that has lost its normal control mechanisms and thus has unregulated growth .
Traveling on a bus is a great way to get around in Germany , and one of the best German bus companies is Berlin Linien Bus .
TR : A NEW DAY IS S-OWN TR : NECTAREAN NICETIES OF THE NORTH TR : PRIMEVAL PLEASURE " Outside of a dog , a book is a man 's best friend .
a classroom is a public place .
That being said , sometimes having a strategy is a good idea , as long as you do n't just have it criticised of course ...
As in open source software , version 1.0 of an unbook is a significant milestone , indicating that it is stable and reliable enough for use by the general public .
" A concubine was a true wife , though of secondary rank .
Giving your young adult an allowance is a good way to introduce them to money and learning how to spend it , but it 's also important for them to learn how to work for their money .
Now what we 're trying to wrestle with as an administration is the fact that we do need to recognize that there are unique threats that we 're now facing , but that we have to approach those threats and how we deal with them in line with certain principles .
Ben Rhodes : " Now what we 're trying to wrestle with as an administration is the fact that we do need to recognize that there are unique threats that we 're now facing , but that we have to approach those threats and how we deal with them in line with certain principles .
Contributions motivated by party affiliation , ideology or a belief that a candidate is the better representative of the citizens ' interests are fine , should be encouraged , and are what we should hope motivates contributors .
Answer : A braindump is a Web site dedicated to cheating on a particular technical certification test or tests .
A podcast is a subscription to an audio broadcasts that you can listen to at your leisure , right on you own computer and / or ipod / mp 3 player .
I think coming back to Washington for a tour was the best move I 've made in a long time !
This photograph of Somalis trying to " catch " a signal is an image of all of us as we stand at the crossroads of humanity , where we must ask ourselves what is truly important , demanding our collective attention in a global society where the issues of migration , borders , war , poverty , technology and communication intersect .
Once a person is a Catholic , he remains bound by the laws of the Church even if he falls away .
In general , I accepted the word of the authors who claim that an object is a pPN .
A dipole moment of a molecule is the product of the charge and the distance between the charge .
A life is a life .
I always thought that a meteor was a fat prostitute :confused: You 're not related to the dyslexic pimp who opened a warehouse , by any chance ?
Wearing a helmet is a positive action .
A section is an identifiable set of GENUKI pages assigned to one or more maintainers , who are responsible for their integrity and currency .
Becoming a member is a first step to getting involved in Durham 's fantastic theatre scene , be it treading the boards , directing the action , working backstage , rigging the lights , making the costumes , designing the sound or simply enjoying the show .
Great result for the U 's - a win 's a win .
Tom Cranmer wrote : Great result for the U 's - a win 's a win .
[ quote ] [ p ] [bold]Tom Cranmer [ / bold ] wrote : Great result for the U 's - a win 's a win .
[ quote ] [ p ] [bold]In_The_Nikon_Time [ / bold ] wrote : [ quote ] [ p ] [bold]Tom Cranmer [ / bold ] wrote : Great result for the U 's - a win 's a win .
One of the main causes of death ( if not the main ) in an accident is the vehicle rolling , take into account that 4 x 4 s are many times more likely to roll than a normal car and you can see it 's really not as good as people think .
It cracks me up that picking up chicks at a bar was the example used to illustrate success in a personal finance blog .
Another aspect that makes a difference is the legal liability laws .
They believe that a nanomachine is a potential threat to the biosphere because it may somehow compete ( with machine-like and potentially brutal efficiency ) with lifeforms for some essential resource .
Remember , a budget is a structure to help you reach your financial goals .
Of course , 20 hours a day is an exaggeration !
A committee is a group that keeps minutes and loses hours .
A meningocele is a form of spina bifida .
When I was growing up in the dim and distant twentieth century spin-off was one of the most frequently used buzz words in the public discussion of science and technology ; a spin-off being an unintended and unexpected positive product of scientific or technological research .
Appearance & Characteristics : A vortex is a very strange and mysterious phenomena .
The whole a person coming from a rib is a bit far fetched for some do you not agree ?
A redshift is a shift in the frequency of a photon toward lower energy , or longer wavelength .
A letter sent by the Board to the complainant notifying the complainant that there is no probable cause of a violation is a " notice of .
To me , a budget is a list of planned income and expenses .
For me using a budget is a constant , at least weekly , activity .
If a string is the last entry on a line ( no further parameters or punctuation ) , then the trailing quote mark need not be entered .
Whether or not overt signaling is worth an eye-raise is another matter , though : if our maxim happens to be " do nothing that a judicious use of contextual judgment cannot obviate " , though , I 'd consider the judgment , in turn , then neither worth much attention : surely we 'd understand the intent , make a mental note on interpretation , and move on to matters more meaningful to both .
" But a coverup is a necessity with a baby in tow .
Put simply an algorithm is a recipe for solving problems in the formal sciences , i.e. mathematics , formal logic and computer science .
When a model is a graph , then the numerous graph computing technologies can be applied to it .
A graph is a data structure composed of vertices and edges .
A graph is a data structure made up of vertices and edges .
" A pipe is a simple function that maps an input to an output .
A meta-pipe is a pipe that maintains pipes internal to it .
A graph is a generic structure .
Raking through it in a hurry is a sure way to breakage !
Estimating geographic information from an image is an excellent , difficult high-level computer vision problem whose time has come .
Also note that " buying in " to a market is a myth unless you are a nation that can afford to dump product on another market until there are no manufacturers there to compete with you .
A sufficiency is both nourishment and pleasure .
For a sufficiency is both nourishment , and pleasure , and health ; but excess is injury , and unpleasantness and disease .
A cone is a cone , or cone mandrel .
" A model is a construction that describes a much simpler universe , including some features of the actual universe and neglecting others .
This sense of poignancy carries through into the rest of the sequence as we watch Bobby from a distance being all ranchy , riding with the cattle , while some horses do their thing .
An improvisation is a spontaneous performance , whereas a devised performance is rehearsed and scripted .
Records managers in an academic setting might say a transcript is a record .
If I wish to know if a receipt is a record , I can simply check the Association of Records Managers and Administrators ( ARMA ) .
The hiring of a lawyer is an important decision that should not be based solely upon any single source of information , including advertising on this Web site .
The dominant hue of a chromaticity is the wavelength at which a line from the white point through the chromaticity intersects the spectrum locus .
The excitation purity of a chromaticity is a measure of how far a chromaticity is from the white point .
Two that come to mind that I enjoyed a lot were A Cowboys Tears by Anne Mcallister and the last Mary Balogh novella .
If an infant is the result of a relationship and actually is a part of the story , that 's one thing , but I personally find all of the emphasis on breeding disturbing ( and the titles of some of the books I 've seen make me want to heave , personally ) .
One of the greatest areas of strain in a marriage is the sphere of finances .
a book is a book is a ... well , you get the point .
If I think a book is a keeper , then I wait for it to come out in paperback and get it from the used book store .
An alternative is a brand new Porsche Boxster and £ 11,000 spending money .
Traditionally a myth is an ancient story involving supernatural beings that serves two functions .
The HAT IN A BAG was a result of Abby 's personal quest for a travel hat to use backpacking at high altitudes , where the sun 's damaging ultraviolet rays are increased .
The fact that many of them considered him a Frenchman was a painful wound to someone with such faith in his Slavic identity and such a desire to put his work into the service of his country .
Vitamin A deficiency is a significant public health problem in Cambodia .
A hospital is no place to be sick .
Furthermore , it is very arguably correct that , necessarily , a person is an individual substance ( regardless of whether that person is material or immaterial , and regardless of whether that person 's embodiment is biological or cybernetic ) .
A job is no longer something we " do , " but instead something we " are .
According to Ocholla ( 2000 ) a curriculum is a fundamental part of any education or training programmes which gives information on content , purpose , methods , etc. of a programme or course of study .
The foregoing definitions clearly points to the fact that a curriculum is a series of learning experiences as well as an instrument that is use in training prospective students in a school , so as to impart in them the skills relevant to their chosen professions .
To be sure , in other episodes they have nailed sublime moments and the have nailed sublime scenes , but the third act of ONE AGAINST AN ARMY is the most intense , profound , and telling of any act in Xena .
If a horse is a first-time starter , Texas Racing Commission rules state the following in Sec 313.103 .
fire strike : First off how good a friend is this ?
A bit is a single " on " / " off " value .
Merging a branch is a pretty common operation when using Git .
Iterating over an array to search for an item is a pretty common task .
One hint that the environment also may play a role is the history of ALS in Guam , where incidence of the disease between 1940 and 1965 reached 50 to 100 times its worldwide rate and became the leading cause of death among natives .
My next attempt at a solution was a utility called SpamFire .
An embryo or a fetus is a distinct living being of human origin .
The answer is not that an embryo is an embryo , not a human being .
That is no different than saying a teenager is a teenager or a toddler is toddler .
Abstract : The holist view is that the creativity of an author is the manifestation of the creativity of the group he or she belongs to ; the individualist view is that the creativity of the group is merely the sum of the creativities of the individuals who constitute that group .
KR : A movie is a more creative process .
A pegboard is an easy and visible solution .
Well , a bribe is a PGM , a much cheaper precision-guided munition ; " it achieves the aim but it 's bloodless and there is zero collateral damage .
Submitting the file for publication will trigger an email to the Web Services team , who will review the file to ensure that a PDF is the best option for adding this content to the Extension website .
A pedophile is a pedophile regardless of whether or not they 've actually molested a child .
Getting massive amount of work done in a day is an extremely challenging task for many .
According to the " Merriam-Webster Dictionary , " a hacker is a professional computer programmer .
A diaeresis is a pause between one metron and the next , at the end of a word , generally marked with two vertical lines .
A dithyramb was a choral hymn ( hymn performed by a chorus ) , in ancient Greek tragedy , sung by 50 men or boys to honor Dionysus .
An eccyclema is a wheeled device used in ancient tragedy .
A stasimon is a stationary song , sung after the chorus has taken up its station in the orchestra .
I personally dont think allowing someone to carry on harming in a hospital is the right approach but everyone has thier own views on methods and prevention .
Oh and statistics actually show that a rottweiler is the favoured dog of drug dealers !
an idler was a crew member who did not do night watches .
why do some people tend to treat animals like people , a dog is a dog , a cat a cat , etc. ive got a bullterrier who is part of the household but is not held on the same level as the kids & grandkids etc That 's hardly the point is it ?
why do some people tend to treat animals like people , a dog is a dog , a cat a cat , etc. ive got a bullterrier who is part of the household but is not held on the same level as the kids & grandkids etc Have you ever seen that prog ' it 's me or the dog ' on C 4 - full of people who treat their animals like human beings !
To be fair , I have a fish , two cats and a dog and the fish has never shown me any love :huh: If you have n't had a dog or even a cat , then you wo n't understand what I 'm trying to say because a fish is a very different kind of pet to a dog for instance .
You 're right though I think a militia is a kind of army .
Be satisfied with success in even the smallest matter , and think that even such a result is no trifle .
However , a key quotation on the whole subject is attributed to the linguist Max Weinreich : ' A language is a dialect with an army and a navy ' , said to have been published in an academic article in 1945 .
I get paid a fair whack but am not fussed about arriving in style , A car 's a tool which is to be used for its practicality .
A car 's a tool which is to be used for its practicality .
nowadays a car is a status symbol - If you have a decent job , you buy a car that says " look at me " .
A car is a bad investment IMO but if you can afford it or choose to stretch your budget then that 's up to the person All depends which car you buy .
" In modern usage , a stereotype is a simplified mental picture of an individual or group of people who share certain characteristic ( or stereotypical ) qualities .
Blueprint [ disambiguation ] A blueprint is a large-format reproduction , usually of an architectural or engineering plan .
Blueprint A blueprint is a type of paper-based reproduction usually of a technical drawing , documenting an architecture or an engineering design .
aspx Another give a way is the price , ASW compatable oils are expensive ... even Comma ASW is £ 11 ish a litre ...
:confused: i have had my fox scales since the day they came out and my batteries get changed twice in a season so i dont think that 2 sets of batteries over a year is a bad deal ?
Metadata is the key , products like Aperture if you have a Mac or Lightroom for a PC is the key and let them manage it .
One more reason to consider a mac is the VERY cheap and very capable alternative to lightroom : Aperture .
The MBA is a lot nice then the pro when it comes to general looks and the screen etc. But the only thing that 's putting me off getting an air is the lack of disc drive , because I make my own CD ' s / mix tapes as well .
they didnt put out fake photos , the ones saying its a lie are the ones that in the end , lied .
A threat is a concrete thing and the police should know about it incase he did do something to you ... then at least they 'd know where to look !
" Sharing a bed is the ultimate intimacy and latest research from America suggests that this intimacy helps to lower stress hormones and encourage feelings of safety and security , " said Jessica Alexander of The Sleep Council .
I am hoping that his friends and family advise him to take the offer and drop it so I will try to write with reason and facts and take into account that someone else maybe reading this which I have a feeling is the case he is so obsessed that he would be sharing this with others if not driving them mad .
Cold Turkey as a process undergone voluntarily as a cure is another traumatic form of unlearning , of which one more variant remans to be listed and briefly discussed .
A subdomain is a subfolder of the storage on your hosting , which in essence acts as a subfolder of your website .
A paddock is a linear context , V = ( : ( V : a+b ←a :( : V |)) ←b :) = transpose(V) , equipped with a symmetric binary operator , construed as mutiplication on V , for which ( : ( V : u.v ←u :( : V |)) ←v :) is a linear isomorphism ( { scalings of V } :| ( : V |)) , i.e. for each v in ( : V |) , ( V : u.v ←u |( : V |)) is linear and commutes with every linear ( V : :( : V |)) .
Drilling a borehole is a surprisingly straightforward exercise using relatively simple and lightweight equipment .
The only one that ever made it onto an album was an anti-drug song I had written some years back called ' My God And Devil ' .
A commission is the only forum where an agreement of the following kind is possible : ' Give me two thousand Serbs in Sarajevo , here are three and a half thousand Bosniaks for you in Prijedor , but only if we reduce the number of Croats .
For some sixteen years , N. W. Ayer carefully cultivated the romantic image in the public 's mind that a diamond was a unique manifestation of nature and the rarest of all precious objects in the world .
Another worth a visit is The Withies Inn at Compton , near Godalming .
This is n't a blanket recommendation that everyone run out and start using these prescription meds , but it is advice that discussing this with a vet is the appropriate start .
Of course , a city being a net beneficiary of space of flows does not imply all its population will benefit , but it does set a limit on the resources that can be shared either more or less equally .
For most people , becoming a professional is the result of many years of playing and training , often starting at a young age .
Another tool that is also an enabler is the knowledge base .
A team is a small number of people with complimentary skills who are committed to a common purpose , performance goals and approach for which they hold themselves mutually accountable [ 2 ] .
An appraisal is an important occasion and should be treated as such .
The Travellers in a way were the first ' greens ' that we can speak of ; they lived on their wits and like other Traveller and Gypsy groups they adapted to new employment niches in the ' mainstream ' economy as and when they presented themselves ( and were worth engaging in ) .
A slightly different definition is used in the UNHCR Statute , which also refers to a refugee being a person unable to return for reasons ' other than their personal convenience ' .
Many also advocated for patient autonomy , claiming that whether or not to use a drug was a personal choice-a choice that the government should n't deny as long as the drug was safe .
@ Random 832 The problem is that even dragging people to court for a judicial determination on whether a suit is a SLAPP or not can do harm .
But some minors are ready for marriage , and requiring the parents and the minor and the older man to all agree to a contract is a reasonable way to reduce the incidence of abuse .
Euler says that observation alone is not enough to determine whether the solid of a comet rotates and that the tail of a comet is a great collection of dust particles that are driven from the core of the comet by the sun 's rays and are then gathered together behind the comet where they reflect sunlight .
A sword is a long-edged piece of metal , used as a cutting , thrusting weapon .
Under COPA , a minor is any person under 17 years of age .
A reference to : one gender includes a reference to the other genders ; a clause is a reference to a clause of this licence ; including , includes , for example , in particular or any similar expression shall be construed as illustrative and shall not limit the sense of the words , description , definition , phrase or term preceding those terms ; d .
An open house on a weekend is a chance for your real estate agent to meet potential new clients , and to make it seem like they are doing something to sell your house , but that really only is a seeming .
An example was the 4th line in the 4th stanza of the singer 's famous " A Hard Rain ' s-A-Gonna Fall , " saying " I met a white man who walked a black dog .
The Obama campaign 's decision to omit a mandate is a puzzling one , both from a policy perspective -- you want the largest possible risk pool -- and a political one .
While determining whether a chemical is a potential carcinogen might appear to be a rather simple task , it turns out to be a very difficult one .
Although the condition of cancer requires tumors to be malignant ( invading other tissues ) , benign tumors ( non-invasive ) are also counted in determining if a chemical is a suspected carcinogen .
The software recommended for such a search is the program QSR N 6 , a program that is relatively easy to get to grips with , providing instant searchable indexes amenable to initial and refined queries .
A colonoscope is a thin , tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing .
An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film , making a picture of areas inside the body .
In using geological carbon sequestration ( GCS ) as a CO 2 abatement technology , interfacial tension ( IFT ) between supercritical CO 2 and the aqueous phase in a reservoir is the principal physical property that determines the storage capacity of the reservoir and the storage pressure above which CO 2 may flow through the sealing cap rock overlying the storage unit .
Optimising a framework is a very different job than optimising your rails application .
A watermark is a unique text string or graphic that is automatically added to your images to mark them as " yours " and to hamper other people from being able to " steal " your images .
For me it was an obvious dead end , but a job 's a job .
In part i did n't want to share it because that would make me out to be a victim , coming to terms with being a victim is a tough call .
And when the result of such an omission is a hilarious , man-on-the-street commentary ( McCrea directed the clip , which features people listening to the song on headphone and voicing their reactions ) , the post-modernity ( the word I really wanted to use was " coolness " ) of the concept more than compensates .
Three hours of homework five nights a week is a routine expectation in high schools , and the real figure may come closer to four or five for students with challenges of one sort or another .
An atom is a collection of matter consisting of a positively charged core ( the atomic nucleus ) which contains protons and neutrons , and which maintains a number of electrons to balance the positive charge in the nucleus .
An element is a class of atoms which have the same number of protons in the nucleus .
An ion is a charged species , or an atom or a molecule that has lost or gained one or more electrons .
A compound is a substance with a fixed ratio of chemical elements which determines the composition , and a particular organization which determines chemical properties .
A molecule is a combination of two or more atoms in a definite arrangement held together by chemical bonds .
A phase is a set of states of a chemical system that have similar bulk structural properties , over a range of conditions , such as pressure or temperature .
The horizontal space of a character is the width of the letter M in the font , shown in Figure 4.6 .
While impressing human beings comes with its own set of complications ... the fact that a human being is able to interpret interactions and deal with some ambiguity ( they may recognize that a typo is a typo for instance ) .
A polygon is a closed geometric figure with sides made up of line segments .
The last time I heard Troy Aikman on a game was the Viking / Detroit of 2010 .
A party is a perfectly good reason to gather the cast in the same place , heighten the dynamic , elevate the drama .
A recent example of how not to make an estimate is the study recently published by the Asia Arms Control Project at Georgetown University .
The normal rules of political reporting - analyzing a politician 's every word and deed as a political tactic - are suspended when Ryan is involved .
Many students mentioned the challenges of learning how Wikipedia works , and how editing an article was a lot more work than they imagined .
While scientists already contribute to Wikipedia in a self-organized manner ( an example being the Gene Wiki effort ) , we have never made a systematic , large-scale effort to invite them to participate .
While being a mom is a full-time job , these women have been able to showcase their incredible talents through the help of social media .
This is the type tool , or still in a dream is a good idea .
When investigating a compromise , checking the file signatures for all files on a system is a simple , and quite often quick , way of identifying malicious files .
" Scheduling posts is a great option offered by Blogger and a vacation is a perfect reason to make use of it .
Running a blog is a totally different experience than creating with your hands but it can still be considered hand work , which means that you can do it !
But unlike the others I understood that a website is a product , like a car , for instance .
A grade is the specifications in the item such as quality , size , colors , fabric content , etc. They come shipped to us in bales of 100 lbs .
What brought it to an end were the barbarians .
One of the wonderful things about being a CEO is the ability to communicate to employees and agents without leaving an incriminating paper trail .
The " right " to butcher a child is a false right .
A beloved novel by a beloved author , God Is an Englishman is a treasure both for Delderfield fans and the growing legion of fans of historical fiction .
Climbing a mountain was the one thing that stood between me and Edinburgh .
A reader is a human OR machine who actually wants to do something with the published material .
Studies have shown that if a mother believes a baby is a girl , she 'll talk more to that baby than she will if she thinks the baby is a boy .
Obtaining a structural characterization of the biologically-active ( native ) state of a protein is a long standing problem in computational biology .
According to a poll at the time by the Charlotte Lozier Institute , 77 percent of Americans supported a law banning abortion when " the fact that the developing baby is a girl is the sole reason for seeking an abortion .
A setback is a single event or specific series of events that impedes your forward progress as an organization .
Still a win is a win , and Hamed at 33 -0 has yet to be beaten .
An automorphism is an isomorphism from a group $G$ to itself .
Then the map that sends $ a \ in G$ to $ g ^ { -1 } a g$ is an automorphism .
At least down here , those of us who are n't parents and who make less than $ 100 K a year are the ones on the receiving end of the bad messages about having children .
A weblog is a means to broadcast ( distribute identical content to many consumers ) .
Art can be boring if the emphasis of an artwork is some cool sensor or something .
Junkie XL : No , they 're definitely connected , but I think an album is an album - it should be enjoyable to pay at home and it should n't be something to copy exactly live .
Perhaps the single biggest problem in achieving the implementation of a strategy is the difficulty of ensuring that everyone in the organization understands what the strategy is , and that top management really wants everyone else to follow it .
A malt is a whisky made purely from water and barley from a single distillery .
A blend is a whisky that is a mixture of different malts blended with neutral tasting grain whisky .
And , if a noun is an anarthrous preverbal predicate nominative , then , nearly every time , it is Qualitative , not indefinite cf. John 1:1 c , 14 ; 4:24 4:24 ; etc. ; cf. Wallace , BBGG , 26 ff. , etc. .
A path is a sequence of the matrix cells where each pair of neighbouring cells in the sequence is adjacent .
The description of a path is a sequence of cells .
Such an event was the presentation of Victor Ullmann 's Der Kaiser von Atlantis in Carswell Auditorium on the campus of Meredith College .
A ride beneath the Caribbean on a mini-submarine is a memorable one-time shore excursion for anyone who loves snorkeling , diving , or exploring .
Building an audience is an a tactic in the overall game of influence .
A date-string is a quoted string containing the following components : yyyy-mm-dd hh :mm: ss.uuu - Date / time literal yyyy - Year mm - Month dd - Day of the month hh - Hour mm - Minute ss - Second uuu - Millisecond Date / time components may be omitted on the right ; any omitted components are assumed to match any value allowed .
A time-out was a good suggestion .
What always held me back from an iMac was the screen , it was very reflective and not conducive to color correction work .
I think the life of an artist is the best life a person can have .
In particular , Boxer wants the agency to look into whether a virus is the culprit or if environmental factors are involved .
A meritocracy is a system in which the people who are the luckiest in their health and genetic endowment ; luckiest in terms of family support , encouragement , and , probably , income ; luckiest in their educational and career opportunities ; and luckiest in so many other ways difficult to enumerate -- these are the folks who reap the largest rewards .
A career decision based only on money and not on love of the work or a desire to make a difference is a recipe for unhappiness .
To call President Obama a liberal is a stretch .
Okay , " Dancing Outlaw , ' ' not getting caught up in a day of wasted time here , but a revolver is a form of pistol , handgun , and my point was that we always get caught up in the debate not that it was present .
Nine years ago , making 1,000 euro a month was a nightmare for overqualified 30 - somethings ...
A caul was a small bag pinned over the bun and hair at the back of the head , like the woman to the left is wearing .
Bedding that has been slept in a few times and smells like sleeping ferret will be even better than clean bedding for convincing a ferret that a corner is a bedroom instead of a bathroom .
An example is the drying of Africa during the onset of glacial ( cooler ) periods in the last ~ 5 Ma , which led to reduced rainforests and more savannah , and the consequent evolution of an upright ape on the savannah-the hominid line ( that 's us ) .
For most Americans , carrying an ID is an everyday occurrence needed to participate in modern life .
The Senator who stood up on the senate floor and talked of Cuba being a paradise is an idiot .
Going through a proxy is a REALLY REALLY bad idea .
" I do think receiving a waiver is a huge milestone for a lot of states , and I get a feeling states will stick with it , " he said .
I would n't have a problem were an agreement reached that would guarantee its ultimate re-entry back into a major conference .
A : A gallery is a collection of photographs showing your participation in the collector car hobby .
Raising a child is the supreme act of devotion and faith in God and is practiced and tested every day .
I mean no offence here , but that 's as impossible as a person being a Christian murderer , liar , pedophile , astrologer , or witch .
Complex programs may track variations or continuations , and may need to decide whether such a sequence is a replacement of the retracted moves , or a variant or what .
A waelpot is a 16th c .
But that hardly means that the lack of a draft is the reason for obesity now .
A community working on an idea is a great way to achieve that .
An aunt is a sinologist at the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education .
The Exhibit shows that the mean return associated with any desired risk position will be greater if strategy X is adopted instead of strategy Y. But the slope of such a line is the Sharpe Ratio .
If there 's anything we can learn from the hacking incidents of the past decade , it 's that collecting valuable data , concentrating it in one place , and making it accessible over a network is a really dumb thing to do .
A UFO is a plausible event that - in many cases , can be verified as having no explanation .
The problem of forming a federation is the effort required by each organization to implement and keep current with all the agreements .
Surely a highlight was the protests in San Diego where Medea Benjamin of CODE PINK led a protest at the home of Neal Blue , chief executive officer of General Atomics which manufactures the Predator drone .
A tab is a promise , cash is the truth .
This reputation helps in early-detection of whether the file or a program is a malware or not .
A topic is a unit of information with a title and some form of content , short enough to be specific to a single subject or answer a single question , but long enough to make sense on its own and be authored as a unit .
In DITA , a topic is the basic unit of authoring and of reuse .
An object is a separate , self-contained , encapsulated entity , and the term encapsulation is important in OO .
A bookmap is a special kind of DITA map that defines the major structures and setup information for producing maps of information as a book .
A booklist is a specialized topicref that indicates a collection of information from the content of a book .
Creating a distribution is a complex task .
Drumming under the full moon around a fire on top of a hill is an emotional , spiritual experience that is available to anyone , whether you know each other or not , with or without formal spiritual training , technical drum training or new age personal growth consciousness training .
A filter is an object that performs filtering on Strings .
A course is an ordered set of lessons .
The more complete a course is the more the trainee can learn from it .
Within the context of Free and Open Source Software projects , a community is another way of describing the collective body of individuals that contribute to a project in a positive way .
A crime is a crime is a crime .
These factors are interconnected and are intended to help guide an issuer in assessing the reasonable likelihood that a purchaser is an accredited investor - which would , in turn , affect the types of steps that would be reasonable to take to verify a purchaser 's accredited investor status .
Issuer 's should recognize that the steps that will be reasonable to verify whether a purchaser is an accredited investor will vary depending on the type of accredited investor that the purchaser claims to be .
For example , the steps that may be reasonable to verify that an entity is an accredited investor by virtue of being a registered broker-dealer - such as by going to FINRA 's BrokerCheck website - will necessarily differ from the steps that may be reasonable to verify whether a natural person is an accredited investor .
A war is a war is a war is a war is a war is a war ...
An aquifer is the porous rock structure that holds water underground .
A tracer is a material which gives information concerning the direction of movement and / or the velocity of the water and potential contaminants which might be transported by the water .
For example , whether a function is a product of two degree-d polynomials , whether a function splits into a product of d linear polynomials , and whether a function has low rank are all examples of degree-structural properties and are therefore locally characterized .
Thus , such a requirement is a reasonable screening criterion for bids .
One example of such a model is the user profile which is often described using a CC / PP vocabulary .
A Right to Exclude , but not to Use A patent is a property right granted by a government to an inventor or his assignee to exclude others from making , using , or selling an invention fulfilling certain requirements , most notably that it performs a « useful » function .
What then typically results in such a scenario is a cross-license between the original and improvement patent owners , with or without money being thrown in .
All of patent law , on the other hand , is based on the assumption that an invention is a discrete and novel entity that can be assigned to the individual who is determined by the courts to be its legitimate creator .
Some wiseacre has said that a genius is a man who " wears long hair , eats queer food , lives alone , and serves as a target for the joke makers .
" Even without knowing how long a feature is going to take , it 's easy to see that forking a bug is a " small " feature while the big , vague " Personalizable Home Page " feature was large .
For others , however , the fact that Uranus was a myth is the most important feature , because to them the public understanding of uranium is mired in fable .
One of the few good things about summer coming to an end is a weekly event that most of us celebrate surrounded by friends and family , yelling at the TV and eating a buffet of finger foods .
] This affair has improved our credibility , as we were able to detect a hoax within seconds ... our equipment can tell within seconds whether a ring is a hoax or not ...
Anyone can be committed if a trained medical provider can be convinced that a person is a danger to himself or others .
Accepting an apology is a reasonable explanation of why resignation should not be called for. Where I differ is that I do not believe that this matter is something that should so easily be swept away with an apology .
A probe is a short string of DNA with base sequence complementary to ( able to bind with ) the sequence of an altered gene .
Show whether a person is a carrier for a genetic disease .
And obviously an American moving around and particularly a businessman is a number one target over there .
To call Glover an idiot is an insult to idiots worldwide .
A restaurant is a ridiculous target for people who demand public housing .
A tablet is an intermediary device .
Yet let the tablet stands alone when you are traveling and pulling out a laptop is a bit of an inconvenience .
What you got correct is that a tablet is a consumption device , not a production device .
According to the EU " Network of Independent Experts on Fundamental Rights " doctors should sometimes be forced to perform abortions , even if they have conscientious objections , because the right to abort a child is an " international human right .
A ute a cell phone and a dog is all you need !
But to sit back and pretend that no-one but a climate scientist can correctly read and interpret a graph is an insult to an engineer 's intelligence .
Tom Scharf says , " But to sit back and pretend that no-one but a climate scientist can correctly read and interpret a graph is an insult to an engineer 's intelligence .
All the footage I have seen of a rehearsal is the conductor trying to keep with the orchestra , when surely a conductor 's job is to work with them and tell them how they would like the work to be played .
An actor 's evaluation of a role is a subject of ongoing frustration to producers and directors alike .
But if negotiating a star 's exit from a movie is a delicate operation , negotiating his entry can be vastly more demanding .
the only nationwide story of a snake eating a cat was the luka magnotta case .. and if you indeed did see that news article and have misread it ... look it up on the net .. and believe me you will never ever talk of cats being eaten by snakes in a serves them right way again .
A hamstring is that kind of injury .
Returns a with the specified as its root , which displays the root node and which decides whether a node is a leaf node in the specified manner .
A handle is a small icon that displays adjacent to the node which allows the user to click once to expand or collapse the node .
public JTree ( TreeNode root , boolean asksAllowsChildren ) Returns a with the specified as its root , which displays the root node and which decides whether a node is a leaf node in the specified manner .
A franchise is a form of co-operative strategy in which a firm ( the franchisor ) develops a business concept and then offers this to others ( the franchisees ) in the form of a contractual relationship to use the business concept .
but the one of the attractions of such a system is the ability to harvest and ultimately sell personal information .
Just in from Naomi Klein , author of " No Logo " : A New Climate Movement in Bolivia Excerpt : " In the words of Bolivia 's ambassador to the UN , Pablo Solón , " The only thing that can save mankind from a tragedy is the exercise of global democracy .
Cllr Edey wondered if that was the case even if a development was a risk to residents .
Test whether an interface is an MXBean interface .
An interface is an MXBean interface if it is annotated or or if it does not have an annotation and its name ends with " " .
Skipping with a rope is an excellent form of exercise .
my soul is white ; White as an angel is the Australian child , But I am black , as if bereaved of light .
Closest thing in the white world to a nigger is a spud munching thick fucking Paddy .
I 'm just letting everybody know that , if a company is a Limited Company with more than one insured person , Employers ' Liability is compulsory regardless of relationship to the proposed person .
But choosing a dorm as a freshman is no easy task .
Fifty years ago , running a regression was a lot of work - done by hand or , if you were lucky , on an electric calculating machine that did addition , multiplication , and not much else .
A crime was an offense against the Crown - the case was Rex v. Friedman .
Anyway , I would have called the cache a recursor , because a cache is a very general term .
A homemaker is an individual who has received substantial rehabilitation services resulting in the ability to perform tasks required to maintain the home .
A megapixel is a measure of camera prowess where 1 MP means 1 million pixels .
Just as an industry is a collection of companies .
A shadow is an area where direct light from a light source cannot reach due to obstruction by an object .
The cross section of a shadow is a two-dimensional silhouette , or reverse projection of the object blocking the light .
The older a child is the longer it takes to make a definite developmental advance ; and so it follows that the diagnostic values of a probationary year tend to vary inversely with the age of the child . .
And because the real value of a boycott statement like this is getting the boycott to spread and showing people that a boycott is a legitimate , non-violent response to Israeli violence , the boycott-supporters have every reason not to be pushy towards people who do n't share their views .
A pull is a pull , damn it .
Is it important , for instance , that one carefully distinguishes between a confident personality in a child being an internal capability or the product of a loving environment in infancy ( an external circumstance for the infant ) ?
" The criterion for defining the sexual demeanor of a photograph is the arousal value of the images .
What we missed when I was a child was the chance to engage those Catholic school children .
For SEO purposes a link is a seed that can be leveraged into greater traffic .
Similarly , a sun is the manifestation of a solar consciousness , for only a solar consciousness could so manifest ; the plant is the imbodiment of a plant-consciousness ; and an atom , of an atomic consciousness .
Now a glacier is a mass of ice which is everywhere interpenetrated by water , and its internal temperature is therefore everywhere that of the freezing point .
His career as a statesman was an essential part of his prophetic mission .
Richard Holton , a professor of philosophy at MIT and the author of Willing , Wanting , Waiting , points out that a resolution is an attempt to overcome the problem of maintaining an intention when we expect that , at some future time , we will face inclinations contrary to our intention .
You can also use this field to indicate whether a bug is an enhancement request .
Close proximity to a battlefield was a concern for 43 percent .
His brothers had not replied at all , seeming to be indignant with him ; while his father and mother had written a rather sad letter , deploring his precipitancy in rushing into marriage , but making the best of the matter by saying that , though a dairywoman was the last daughter-in-law they could have expected , their son had arrived at an age which he might be supposed to be the best judge .
An example was the review and decision-making process for the recent reconsideration of which instruments to replace during the '97 servicing mission ; the STUC ( and the user community ) were poorly informed and confused about these decisions , whereas an early , broad discussion might have allowed for a more scientifically-based decision .
At the end of a chain is no place for a dog .
Living in Granbury for a time was a man known by the name of John St .
The way of a canoe is the way of the wilderness , and of a freedom almost forgotten .
The man who moved a mountain was the one who began carrying away small stones .
A river is more than an amenity-it is a treasure that offers a necessity of life that must be rationed among those who have power over it .
A river is more than an amenity-it is a treasure .
That he is considered a criminal is an obscenity .
A visionary is an untrained and uninitiated seer , whereas a true Seer is an initiated visionary .
And when a mojito is the featured drink , Shaner mixes in mint that she grows in the restaurant 's garden .
Such an opportunity is a unique and enlightening experience , independent of your future career path .
That is , analogous to H.L.A. Hart 's ( 1961 ) rule of recognition for determining whether a norm is a legal norm , there is also a rule of recognition ( or set of rules of recognition ) for determining whether a decision is a corporate decision .
The fixed unit rate of reimbursement set for a service is the full payment for all rule required services provided to CCP clients by an agency under the Provider Agreement .
" A pleasure 's a pleasure all the world over .
Ireland at the turn of the twentieth century was a nation is the grip of a national liberation movement .
Our ultimate aim is more than just a trail-it is a whole system of them , a cobweb planned to cover the mountains of the eastern country .
Such a trail is the Appalachian [ Trail ] , and such is the kind of journey that , better than on any other trail in existence , may be made upon it .
That land is a community is the basic concept of ecology , but that land is to be loved and respected is an extension of ethics .
Working on research with a professor is a good way to form this relationship with a faculty member .
Grosseteste had said that it was subalternate univocally to the science of proportion , for a harmony is a proportion realized in sounds .
Albert objects that in a demonstration within the science of harmony , the real explanation why it is so does not occur in the science of proportion , for the subject of the science is sounds , not proportions , and what is true of proportions cannot be applied to harmonies directly , as though a sound were a mathematical entity .
In actuality , an attribute is an accident , and so has no proper real definition , indicating what it is entirely in itself , since what it is involves its belonging to an appropriate subject , and it actually belongs to such a subject only under favorable conditions .
For this reason , Ockham insists that the definition of an attribute is a nominal definition , not a real one , and Aquinas holds that the conclusion of a demonstration of the highest sort will be per se both in the second way ( presupposing the subject ) and the fourth ( indicating efficient causation ) ( Aquinas , Commentary on P.A. I 10 ) .
A lemma is an unglamorous result which we use to prove a theorem we 're interested in .
About £ 5 a week is all it costs - an overweight person could easily save enough to pay for this if they cut down on certain food treats etc. Same as giving up smoking - not buying cigarettes pays for the patches or whatever .
Having looked for information in Mel Jones 's book , Sheffield 's Woodland Heritage , I see I was slightly wrong :D Hagg ( or Hags ) do not necessarily contain holly : " A hag is an old name for a coppice compartment " .
Buying a property is an important aspect of life and when that property is in a different country , it brings a whole host of other considerations .
Wearing a poppy is a matter of choice and that is how it should remain .
I think a slap is a bit harsh just for hanging around outside a chip shop .
The myth of the self-made man , has to be profoundly hypocritical : it is the self-serving demonstration that a lie is the truth .
Until recently , on the home page of ORA 's web site uriblank , it stated that " An agunah is a woman whose husband refuses to grant her a Jewish divorce upon request .
Just a thought , but priesthood is the condition of being a priest , and a priest is a person with the authority to administery the oridinaces of their religion .
They said that the fact that we did n't see our parents except for once a week was the same as any boarding school .
RTAA asserted the Commission 's definition of " express advocacy " and approach to determining whether a group is a " political committee " under the Federal Election Campaign Act ( Act ) were vague , overbroad , and violated the First and Fifth Amendments to the Constitution .
In that opinion , the Justices held that a communication susceptible of no reasonable interpretation other than as an appeal to vote for or against a candidate is the " functional equivalent of express advocacy .
An outerview is an all-purpose series of questions most commonly asked by interviewers , coupled with the proper answers from the interviewee .
A test is a measurement of proxy variables .
TA : Potential donors should consider that the records that become part of an archives is the legacy that we leave for future generations .
Each three-set of line diagrams sums to zero -- i.e. , each diagram in a three-set is the binary sum of the other two diagrams in the set .
" Joining this lawsuit as a co-defendant is the most logical and efficient manner for us to resolve the constitutional question , " said FairVote Minnesota Board member and Saint Paul IRV Campaign Coordinator , Ellen Brown .
This is not so , because , even where an action is right , it does not follow that it would be wrong to do something else instead ; whereas , if an action is a duty or an action which we positively ought to do , it always would be wrong to do anything else instead .
Having a baby is a leading cause of poverty spells in the United States .
After all , the interesting part of a project is the present and the future , the past is just past .
For example , a keyboard is an input device , whereas a display monitor is an output device .
When man is at peace with man , how much lighter than a feather is the heaviest of metals in his hand !
Who , now , can conceive my astonishment when , standing facing one of these fabulous beings , I arrived at the conviction that a billionaire is a human being like all the rest !
So that in a way was a response to spending too much thinking and writing about how fragile life is , and wanting to talk about how fantastic life is .
Further , sexual diseases are permanent ; if your partner leaves you , an STD is a burden you will always have .
[ - jp ] === TOPIC : This Week 's Reading ( book comments by Evelyn C. Leeper ) GALACTIC POT-HEALER by Philip K. Dick ( ISBN 9 78-0-679 -75297 -4 ) is a later Dick novel , after he has had time to develop a distinctive voice : " A man is an angel that has become deranged , Joe Fernwright thought .
A bednet is no help in preventing malaria if it is still in its package and not hung up .
" A poet is a bird of unearthly excellence , who escapes from his celestial realm arrives in this world warbling .
An appeal is a mask covering the face of tribulation .
-- Aardwolf 00:09 00:09 , 21 Oct 2005 ( GMT ) A subcategory is a proper category .
Being a sheepdog is a tough life .
" Being a sheepdog is a tough life .
Two dozen workers a day is a good indicator that they lost any hope of containment the first week of the crisis .
Bernstein discusses McGann 's view on the poem as a social act always immersed in human life : " a poem is a social event-a work of literature-embedded in a dynamic , multilayered historical and ideological context .
Let me seed some of Bernstein 's notions from poem to essay : an essay is a social act and event .
But Ive never heard of even an orc being that ugly .
" The moment I discover a man 's a fool I let him drop , but I delight in getting into the confidence and pockets of men who think they ca n't be ' skinned , ' " she told The Times in an 1883 article .
The simplest way to utilize the setting is to call io_lib : printable_list / 1 , which will use the return value of this function to decide if a list is a string of printable characters or not .
I 'm going to be living in a city were the local section of the newspaper has to outsource to report about crime .
A morpheme is the smallest element of meaning in a word .
Learning how to be an entrepreneur is a skill that is cultivated over time .
If b 1 in the first if-statement was true whenever b 2 in the second if-statement is true , then such a warning is a false positive .
Using a sword was the only Ranger skill he didnt already possess some level of skill in .
A file is an entity where bytes are stored and the lore of programming has been to treat characters and bytes as interchangeable .
Even at sea , a knife is a primary survival tool .
An example is a smart meter that uses Wi-Fi to communicate with the utility , and both Wi-Fi and ZigBee to communicate with sensors and switches within the home .
A holofote is a spotlight , as in " single light " ; it is sometimes described as an olhoforte , or " strong eye " .
An externality is an economic impact resulting from your activity that is kept outside the scope of your organization 's financial accounting .
Because honestly , a jail 's a jail and they 're going to treat you bad .
A prenup is an agreement between potential spouses made in consideration of marriage and effective upon the marriage itself .
A session is the series of events between logging in and logging out of the computer .
Offering them in a feeder is a safer alternative .
Context reductions The amount of reductions a process is a allowed to use before being scheduled out is increased or reduced .
That which destroyeth a vision is the veil over it .
Excellent in hearing , excellent in speaking , is every man that obeyeth what is noble , and the obedience of an obeyer is a noble thing .
For those still thrill-hungry , driving a skidoo is the closest thing you can do to quad-biking on snow .
I wonder if he thinks that being a footballer was a cause of his depression and his addiction ?
a dog is a dog , is a good breeder responsible in the current situation ???
Myself , I can haul outta the road when I hear / see something coming , but a pram is a bit heavier !
A cyclone is a force of nature that sweeps through an area causing massive damage very quickly , then moving on .
But i think Athens as a hole is a city ...
Being a parent is a really tough job .
The function and form of the Egyptian pyramids as a tomb is a clear case of what is known in architecture as development .
The P & A system is a nationwide network of congressionally created , legally based disability rights agencies .
G ' day Mary , I have found making a screenshot is the best .
If you really truly believe a fetus is the same thing as a baby , it should be impossible for you to decide .
We tend to want to drive a wedge between friendship and romance , but I think we have to admit that such a division is a bit artificial and often unhelpful .
I was finding being a pastor was the most exciting thing I 'd ever done .
Paying less than $ 15 a month is a good deal , but the 200 MB data limit is very low .
What transforms a market research study from academic exercise to a truly valuable " force multiplier " for an organization is the extent to which it catalyzed action .
When the strike finally ends , what sort of a raise is the worker likely to get ?
After my experience with Artifice , I definitely agree that releasing a comic as a webcomic is the best way for regular folks like us to build an audience ( and to connect with them ! ) After my one year " experiment " in webcomics , there is no turning back .
Fire , medical , power , and trash coverage are more efficient the smaller the area - a building is a building .
Pointing out that a set is a cognitive abstraction is simply an observation , not a metaphysical claim - though again the ambiguity of metaphysics rears its head .
also , an opinion is an opinion .
The copyright page may say that a book is a first edition , or a first printing , or first impression ; and it may state additional printing information , or it may provide a printing code indicating what printing a book is from .
People are looking to bring their lifes onto the net , one of the things that brings that closer to a reality is the ability to hear live broadcasts of the worlds news , favorite sport ; hear music and to teleconference with others .
6 Even if we feel no need of freeing ourselves of the imperfections acquired while living in the midst of the dangers of the world , the holy and pure life which is required in a priest is a sufficient proof of the need of a spiritual retreat .
In fact , though the ornament of those virtues proper to a priest is the study of sacred things , we must also admit that such a study --- due to that inconstancy to which we have already referred --- in many cases wanes with the passing of time and in not a few dies out altogether .
She is trying to make the painters and sculptors see how a novel is a work of art and is not a painting .
" The most important part of an application is the academic record or transcript .
A dataflow is a directed graph where nodes represent computations and edges represent streams of data : each node or module corresponds to a procedure that is applied on the input data and generates some output data as a result .
A directive is a guideline that must be implemented by individual legislation within the countries of the European Union .
It is not always easy to distinguish whether a factor is a causal agent or a consequence .
Whereas previously I struggled in identifying whether a label was an actionable control or simply a label , iOS 7.1 's Button Shapes hearken back to the iOS 6-sty le , This is a button .
It will establish a system whereby the president of the United States can determine unilaterally that an individual is an " unlawful enemy combatant " and subject to detention without access to court appeal .
Then , those seen asking stone walls for favours and other back-scratchings will be immediately despatched to their asylums without fail instead of the constant drive to manoeuvring The Stupid-Dumb further into their Illusions-Delusions - that of making the Dumb , dumber , an impossibility but when has an impossibility been a hinderance to the insane ?
A spreadsheet is an interface that works with data that contains multiple sections also known as cells that are part of an entire grid in order to be able to categorize them in rows and columns .
I believe that what really makes a difference is the relationship between trade envoys , and the Foreign Office and UKTI .
( A herm was a kind of personified pillar that served as a boundary marker in transitional areas such as crossroads and doorways ; places where underworld spirits were believed to congregate . ) 2008 Season Laboratory analysis and conservation of the excavated materials continues at the Bodrum Museum of Underwater Archaeology and the Bodrum Research Center .
A pond is a small , still body of water .
" A tautology is a contentless statement ; something true by definition and uninformative of the real world .
( A tautology is a phrase-like ' my father is a man ' - containing no information in the predicate ( ' a man ' ) not inherent in the subject ( ' my father ' ) .
A key is an organized list of characteristics of a species or other taxon designed to assist in identification ; computer scientists might call them decision trees .
It 's simple : an algorithm is a set of steps !
Each dot on a worldline is a birthday party , so the middle quint is 10 years old when they all rejoin each other , while the other quints are 6 and 8 years old .
Using a trailer is a great option if you do n't want to give up your bike rides .
To our eyes , the growing self-censorship that we observe as a result is a very dangerous threat to the pluralism of the Turkish media , " he said .
prevent or punish a crime is a question that is inherently linked with the given factual situation .
So being sure to post once a week is a great solution when a blogger needs to put " a hold " on their blog .
In fact , a revolution is the most libertarian thing ever .
We are formed by little scraps of wisdom ~Umberto Eco I am not ashamed to say that no man I ever met was my father 's equal , and I never loved any other man as much ~Hedy Lamarr The heart of a father is the masterpiece of nature . ~ Antoine-François , Abbé Prévost d ' Exiles The father of a daughter is nothing but a high-class hostage .
A node is the smallest unit visible to the user , i.e. the user steps through the tree node-wise ( forward [ down the tree ] , backward [ up the tree ] , etc. ) .
One factor in choosing a camera is the number of pixels , but there are many others .
A collision is the name for a process during which two or more objects exert relatively large forces on each other over a relatively short time .
A raquet striking a ball is a clear example of a collision : before and after contact , the forces between raquet and bat are very small compared with the force exerted during contact , over a period much less than a second .
Actually reading a paper is a serious time commitment .
" A story is a collection of facts in a time-sequenced order that suggest a cause and effect relationship " ( Crawford 1982 ) .
Costikyan ( 2000 ) writes , for example , that " a story is a controlled experience ; the author consciously crafts it , choosing certain events precisely , in a certain order , to create a story with maximum impact .
Playing a game is a bit different , but the fact is the brain becomes over stimulated after too much nonstop action " ( Dunniway 2000 ) .
Any intentional contact with an official during a game is an auto DQ .
FinFan 68 says : Dec 23 , 2012 6:45 6:45 PM Any intentional contact with an official during a game is an auto DQ .
* * * Kicking a player is an ejection too , yet he did n't get ejected for either one .
:D ( An endearment is a good thing ) .
However Unblocking a phone is a completely ILLEGAL practice and we do not offer such a service for this .
The models doing so assume that the collision creates a BH because the two charged particles are forced so close together that the electrostatic repulsion becomes moot ( a proton is a collection of gluons of different signs , so some of these gluons could combine ) and that they could therefore create a minor black hole .
This take on it gives more meaning to the sequence 6 -7 -8 -- being able to lead an army is a step toward being able to lead an empire ( even if it 's a personal / internal army and a personal / internal empire ) .
My suggestion : crossing a river is a way of putting yourself in the best place to receive what you 're waiting for. You 're showing willing - committing yourself to expect , wait and prepare for. ( There 's more to this one than just waiting hopefully , as if for a bus . ) ' Have confidence in the sunlight ' is a really interesting translation .
An ophiolite is a peice of oceanic crust that has become obducted onto continental crust at a destructive plate boundary .
A rock is any aggregate of minerals or organic matter , whether consolidated or not .
A mineral is a grain of material containing only one chemicle .
a cyclothem is a repeated sequence of sediments .
Having no address on an advert is a major put off .
You also can do n't have to make the connections 2 units long any more -- Jittlov has shortened them slightly -- That 's how he solves the problem that a dollar is a little too short compared to the original CP .
For me a thriller is a very carefully structured story .
A bot is a perfect way to learn , have a look at Rev Ed ones here ( uriblank ) .
In Trojan 's example , a goal was a particular time things were supposed to be happening .
Six months making a movie is a great luxury , and so is working with Milos Forman , who 's a great guy , I like him a lot .
A moment is a situation .
A schema is an abstract , internal mental representation of an idea , event , an action , or a situation .
One thing that helps , or hinders making sense of a text is the knowledge the reader has of the inherent schemata .
As I said at the beginning of this article , a hexagram is a situation .
Another subtle invitation to a burglar is a security sign in the yard but no related stickers on windows .
Whether or not a security is a QCB depends upon a number of factors , including whether it is held by a company or individual .
For an individual , a security is a QCB if ( in essence ) it is a debt denominated in sterling and issued on normal commercial terms .
However , being treated by the doctor , at one penny a week was a luxury , so we were rarely at the house with the ' square chimneys ' .
The bed in a bag is a ready-made matched set .
4.2 Getting a stockbroker is a good idea and essential if you are looking to raise money , or float on AIM .
Quite simply because a clock was a masculine word up until the 18th Century .
As a sideline is this site muzzled by Murdoch as the News International has not yet made an impact on here .
Owning a home is an inherent american right .
THE tale of the island soldier who faced up to the Taliban gunmen on a tractor is a heart-warmer .
Danny , 35 , recalled : " As any parent who has been through it knows , losing a child is an un­imaginable loss .
Equally symbolic of Ch ' an doctrine is the ninth picture in which the world reappears but the oxherd does not , indicating not only that emptiness does not destroy phenomena but merely renders them non-absolute in their interdependence , but also the oxherd 's own tranquil and unobtrusive observation of reality " just as it is " .
Bad credit loan onlinea popular alternative to a bad credit bank loan or going to a lending company for a loan is a bad credit loan online .
I dont care about fancy football , ala SAF , a win is a win .
A station is a station , they are all much the same and all we want is our train to be on time .
The item for which I entered in a contract is a Designer Kitchen .
Vera Langley , Training Manager at Glen Dimplex Home Appliances , says turning a feature into a benefit is the key to making a sale .
Is it possible to show whether a module is a core module or an optional module ?
A shaduf is a large pole balanced on a crossbeam , a rope and bucket on one end and a heavy counter weight at the other .
A mountain is a landform that rises high above the surrounding terrain in a limited area .
A home is a place that provides security , privacy , decent living conditions , and links to a community .
And ehm he said a cop 's a cop .
He noted that the appointment of a Special Advocate to test evidence and put forward arguments in closed hearings on behalf of a detainee was a further counterbalancing measure , but again noted that effectiveness was conditional , subject to a prisoner being provided with sufficient information to give effective instructions to the advocate .
The very idea of a bird is a symbol and a suggestion to the poet .
Mr Justice Treacy stated that the NRM policy is clear that where there are indicators to suggest a person is a potential victim of trafficking the matter is simultaneously referred to the police and passed to the Competent Authority , therefore both obligations of investigating and punishing traffickers and protecting victims are instigated .
A book is a version of the world .
For example , you could argue that a handrail is an aid , because it 's easily removable , but your landlord might see it as a physical feature , because it has to be attached to the wall .
In practice , being not ordinary resident is only an advantage if a person is an employee with duties that are undertaken both in the UK and overseas .
The statement quoted is a misrepresentation of Coleman 's work ( Coleman actually found that racial composition of a school is a hugely significant factor - which has been borne out again and again , but is too politically explosive to dwell upon ) .
Being a journalist is a shitty job .
An algorithm is a description of a method of doing something that is detailed enough for a computer to execute .
html when I am building a new site from scratch , as they are the ultimate end of the line for search engines as I visualise things - whereas a folder is a collection area , wether you have other files apart from the index or not .
One of the most visible differences to a coder is the lack of one time necessary DIVS in the style of a page .
( A dirk is a weapon that is a mix that is like half dagger , half sword . ) Pierre retaliated by upper cutting with his single-bladed axe , and cleaved two of the druids in half .
where |a| is the length of a θ is the angle between vectors n is the unit vector perpendicular to a and b whose direction is determined by the left hand skew rule .
A church is a component of God 's plan gathering his people together and the baptist churches believe He will do such work through His word .
Therefore , they say that a church is an excellent method of getting to know the folks of a particular place .
The original proposal to remove the criminal element of a breach was a reaction to " anxiety " of some firms when faced with criminal prosecution for certain operational failures .
A self is an entity , certainly more than a Humean bundle of impressions , and indeed more than an agent , since it thinks before it gets into action .
Has it sometimes been supposed that all that is needed for an explanation is a cause in the sense of a required or necessary condition ?
In marketing we learned that even a brick is a competing product to a hammer for getting nails in the wall , dont fool yourself to believe this is not a competing product !!!
If the lack of such a belief is the correct explanation of the failure of deliberation in this case , then such a belief must be a necessary condition for deliberation .
For on the view that a decision is the closing of previously open possibilities , it is not strictly speaking true to say that someone has reached a decision if , for some reason , it cannot be carried out .
The art of being a guru is a hard one , and at best that of a witness to the self-action of those who enter the path .
The concept of being " brave " in a game is an odd one .
The cards ' potential to drag out games was a real concern , though their uselessness to turn the tide of a game is a bit overstated ( perhaps as an attempt to console players whose collections do not include these cards ) .
In World of Warcraft a quest is a task normally given by an NPC that yields different types of rewards when completed .
Locating a dentist is a bit harder , but here an inquiry in the general chat reveals that there is one located in another part of the city .
The reason why this can still be considered a quest is the fact that it gives the player both quest points and experience points .
Disclaimer : A lot of the fun you get out of a quest is the satisfaction of actually having figured it out .
As we saw from the help file " [ a ] lot of the fun you get out of a quest is the satisfaction of actually having figured it out .
[ 2 ] Juuls definition is as follows : A game is a rule-based system with a variable and quantifiable outcome , where different outcomes are assigned different values , the player exerts effort in order to influence the outcome , the player feels emotionally attached to the outcome , and the consequences of the activity are negotiable .
For example , a diagnosis of anal gonorrhea in a man is a pretty good presumptive indicator of homosexual activity , and many of the male " heterosexual transmission " cases had medical records indicating treatment for this .
An essay is a " polite " form of argument .
The problem with drawing a triangle on a sphere is that : 1 .
Paul wrote , " The problem with drawing a triangle on a sphere is that : 1 .
A sphere is an example of a full physical bounded infinity .
Of course , if a player was a fan of All In The Family , and viewed it every week on television , that did have somewhat of an advantage in playing this game .
Component A component is a retrievable object associated with a package or module .
Package A package is a collection of modules related by authorship , maintenance , or distribution .
Repository A repository is an Internet site that maintains and distributes a collection of software packages .
I suspect a lot is the staff and Republicans just do n't hear the truth .
Sensing limitations are undoubtedly a strong reason for the difficulty , but the lack of a formal framework defining in a general way the nature of a motion for a robot is another big obstacle .
The fact that this is somehow thought to be a prize worth winning on a gameshow is the depression icing on the sadness cake .
By the modern definition , an epidemic is a disease that surpasses an expected level of cases for a certain length of time .
When a decline is the " most rapid " area of growth , how bad can things be ?
According to animal experts , a soft blow to a person is the llama 's way of saying hello .
A function is a raw pointer ( essentially ) and a delegate is a pointer to function + " this " pointer .
So , I wonder if people complained or if the local VA management decided that a hospital is a place where people need to be calm , not raging at the TV or getting into arguments about what one of the wing nuts said .
The problem with sensationalizing a subject is the big letdown the reader has when they actually read the article .
Mirror authentication verifies whether the contents of a mirror is the same as the contents of the original site .
It is because such an assertion is a slander against the Buddha , a misrepresentation and even a denial of the very nature of the Buddha .
A thermometer is a device that measures temperature or temperature gradient , using a variety of different principles .
But while it would certainly be no dishonour to lose to such worthy opponents , a week is a long time in Pop Football , and I do n't think the result will be as bad for us as it may appear ...
Reliable transportation , cellular telephone , and a computer are a must .
CE : I 'm not sure becoming a poet is a decision-though determining to commit to the genre certainly involves the discipline of decision .
The false doctrines flowing from and sealed with the seal of approval by a non-pope is the new doctrine passing for Roman Catholicism .
I do think that many think owning a house is the dream , but I only see it as a place to live in that I can change to match my style along with any modifications .
An example was a lady attending the respite care unit knew one of the residents in the home and were reintroduced after many years of not seeing each other .
The city was right on the border between the Union and Confederacy and such an attack was a constant threat .
Opening a window is a trivial matter , unless your kid died from a fall when they were opening a window ...
We did n't know where we were going - and that often happens when a child is the next step in marriage and suddenly you realize you ca n't have children ( atleast after Dr L 's SCO diagnosis , i was crushed and did feel that way ) - we really did n't know what to do with our time .
its on a conveyor belt , i have paying customers , i refuse to just ' bang up ' a website to be slipped a tenner and i do n't like it when people seem to think that coding a database is a ' 2 minute jobby ' .
- playing in a squad is an absolute pleasure , i played with tim and one of his mates ( sorry do n't know his name ) on friday for a couple of games and it was brilliant .
The idea that you need to be a math 's wizard in order to be a programmer is a misconception .
Traditionally a forum is a place for conversation , questions , getting opinion - and a blog is about sharing your experience .
Traditionally a forum is a place for conversation , questions , getting opinion I 'd say it is a place for conversation , questions , getting opinion .
Wow , all the hype and promotion for the game too , I guess releasing a demo was a bad move as it might put a lot of people off buying the game now .
It 's because being a dustman is a carp job .
because being a dustman is a carp job .
But a month is a long time when a rabbit is cooped up in accomodation that is substandard !
On a wall is a photograph of the ' stand down ' dinner which the Monmouthshire Auxiliaries held here at the end of 1944 shortly after Churchill had disbanded the network ( with no further prospect of invasion , there was no need for a free-range , heavily-armed resistance ) .
i dont ' t expect people to write in the same format , but i know there is corruption , probably more so in politics than in the police , to assume there is not and that a person is lying because they do n't provide a reference of an event is a little silly .
Although I do not want to trouble noble Lords with personal experiences , one incident that struck a chord was the account of the mobile phone system here in Westminster .
The strength of an animal is the strength of its weakest part .
Whereas the whole of a dry dock was once found to be plant , a cottage is a cottage it seems .
Seeing Eva , cloaked in black , cutting through the gang with a scythe is a difficult image to forget , but even more so as she returns to the fold of her home , mist on the lake , instrument of death in her hands .
Basically , one could say that a word is a wonderfully beautiful mailbox , so beautiful that you decide to bring it back in your room as a decoration .
Briefly translated an AIP is the bank saying , " If what you have told us is true then we are prepared to lend you this much " .
Still , it 's hard to gripe when a song is this infectiously upbeat .
I 'm intrigued simply because the founder of a small spiritual fellowship of which I 'm a member was the Rev J. Todd Ferrier , so I say , ' Just wondered , are you in any way related to ...?
( If you are responsible for compiling quiz questions you might like to know that a meer is a measure of ground - 29 yards in length in the Low Peak , but 31 yards in the High Peak .
I actually think that treating CSS development as a project is a good idea .
Trying to get Ben in a carrier is a bit of a task because he is far from tame , he lunges and tries to bite my hand every time I put my hand out for him to step up , so once again it 's a battle of wills .
An unreasonable failure to comply with a notice is an offence .
Traffic in practice is actually the results of end-to-end communication between hosts , so that traffic on a link is an aggregation that hides many flows that share the link .
Finding Eris , facing danger , ith ' rya , dealing with the aftermath of an attack , and an upside down car in a crater are all part of the action .
A tradition is the history of our being in the world .
An example is the following which has been doing the rounds as an email joke : perhaps you have seen it before but not considered it in the light of my explanation ?
However , whilst the term ' skills ' may be used in describing the nature of graduates ' work , it does not follow that the meaning of the term in such a context is the same as the meaning it has in the context of higher education .
A bird is a lightweight but amazingly resilient animal that evolved from lightly built dinosaurs during the Jurassic period , around 150 - 200 million years ago .
A smile is a physical behaviour ( performed by movement of certain muscles of the face ) which may be a greeting , a threat , an apology and so on : " Which act it represents on a particular occasion will depend on the overall definition of the encounter into which it fits and the kind of actions by which we perform the same act .
The closing applying for a mortgage is an important transitional phase in the process .
The phrase has become a meme - a concept with the ability to self-replicate , rather as a gene is a molecule with a similar ability .
A pro-vitamin is a precursor , a compound that is metabolised into a vitamin by the digestive system .
Senior development officer , south somerset homeseducation While hiring a pro is a good idea , there are a few things you can do yourself .
The notion of competence is translated into the notion of ' standards ' , a standard being an element plus the performance criteria .
" A competence is a description of something which a person who works in agiven occupational area should be able to do .
( A host is a company that , for a fee , makes your site available 24 hours a day by maintaining it on a special computer called a Web server .
Also they decided to preview some new songs , which in a shorter than usual set at a festival was a somewhat questionable decision .
But if a compact was entered into last year , when we were in Opposition , that no measure of Parliamentary Reform should pass , or any proposal with that object be made by us - if such a proposal is an act of treason , then the noble lord the member for Stamford [ Lord Cranborne ] and his friends are as guilty of treachery as we who sit on these benches .
Sure , sometimes a cold is a healing crisis .
To be truthful , Dortmund looked there for the taking but given the lack in confidence and new players gelling , a point is a very good result .
Research to help find a cause and a cure is the aim of these gigs .
Jameson would eventually take the flames gently smouldering behind the savage 's wide eyes and turn them into an inferno , but unfortunately her efforts to do so here were marred a little by Tom Baker , who by this point in his tenure had convinced himself that a co-star was an inconvenience that he could do without .
Truth : Never washing your hair after a treatment is a big myth .
A second is the much publicised trade created by the international division of labour ( in practice the shift of production from high-wage to low-wage countries ) .
I think having a timeframe is a bit of a double edged sword .
In its rough form , a diamond is a lusterless , translucent crystal that resembles a chip of broken glass .
It conveys the idea that the ascendancy of a node within a network is both dynamic and temporal .
In general , a buffer is a portion of memory reserved by the computer program in which to hold some data , usually temporarily .
Apologies I have n't seen your research but but it is hardly a surprise that one of the sucess criteria for a leader is a core knowledge of the business .
Having your own business set up and running , then becoming a success is the dream of any aspiring entrepreneur .
Many may assume a warranty is a guarantee that covers just about any damage that can occur within the term offered and few realize the conditions that must be met should that chipped edge or crack suddenly manifest itself on the pride of your kitchen .
A case-in-point is the metropolitan area of western San Bernardino and Riverside counties ( an area known locally as the Inland Empire ) , immediately to the east of Los Angeles and Orange counties .
This riot of a story is a wonderful adventure , and Pepper is an unforgettable character who stays with you long after his story has been told .
A win is a gimme here , Partizan are poor .
A highlight was the closing track ' Paris ' performed with Kanye , which the duo ran through three times because the crowd could n't get enough if it - or them - idols and role models for the inner city youth forming the core of the audience .
A judgment is a court order that says that the money is owed to you , and specifies a date by which it is to be paid .
If an employee is a foreign national you should satisfy yourself they have permission to be employed in the United Kingdom .
Affluence and Influence : Economic Inequality and Political Power in America by Martin Gilens [ Princeton University Press ; 2012 : Guardian Bookshop ; Amazon UK / kindle ; Amazon US / kindle ] In-depth description : Can a country be a democracy if its government only responds to the preferences of the rich ?
The wealth of a defendant is no excuse for committing an offence though , which seems to be what you 're saying .
aramoro wrote : The wealth of a defendant is no excuse for committing an offence though , which seems to be what you 're saying .
The claim that a photograph is a substitute for actual objects ( once present to vision but now absent ) is evident from the earliest accounts of photography .
You realy have to know what you are doing ... quickest way to loose a boat is a gas leak ...
Being a governor is an enormously challenging and rewarding opportunity .
Jonathan Hancock , a former World Memory Champion , always remembers that in German , Hafen means harbour as his teacher told him to associate Hafen with haven because in rough weather , a harbour is a safe haven for ships .
It 's so contagious that just being in the same room with a carrier is a death sentence .
" Well , a futon is a type of bed after all .
Anyone who bought an annuity in recent years at the artificially depressed rates that have been created by QE will be permanently poorer for the rest of their lives - buying an annuity is a one-off irreversible decision .
A groan was the only confirmation he got .
A disco is a good disco if you are in the mood for it , but they can be a bit depressing after a while .
A run is a single assay which involves a 96 well state , and it typically involves 90 odd samples they have been looking at . ...
It is never just the individual skill or experience that matters ( although knowing how to make yogurt from scratch , grow tomatoes and build a shed are all amazing skills ) , it is learning that you can learn these things , and that there is profound joy in the act of learning and doing and making ( and sharing and showing someone else how to do it , too ) .
What you see through a telescope is the steam cloud , or coma .
Often what gets lost in selecting a therapy are the only issues that really matter : Does it help ?
The common sense belief that accurate and honest information is a right , not a privilege is an idea that cuts across demographic lines in hopeful and exciting ways .
[ 12 ] The document as a whole is a considerable improvement over previous versions of the report .
" The issue of whether the City Council can overrule a referendum is an open one , " he said , adding that he believes earlier state cases that allowed legislative bodies to change term limits after a referendum " are not dispositive , " so do not settle the matter .
Drawing on Rosch 's work on categorization , we may suggest that a rock is a prototypical non-agent object , wile water is a peripheral member , and wind is a borderline case .
Being honest with oneself about a work is the test .
Being a teacher is the other side of being a student .
That is because the essence of being a player is the joy of the person playing .
At times with picky eaters , it seems that planning a picnic is an epic fail .
A mammogram is a low-dose X-ray of the breast .
A residency is an endorsement that says to the world , " This artist is worthwhile and is appreciated .
Q : If a person is an employee of contracted entities ( such as Aramark or Follett ) , does he / she have to complete volunteer forms for CCU ?
A wavetable is a section of memory that contains a representation of a segment of sound .
I think that perception is especially strong of where the victim or the accused of a crime is a member of a minority group .
Also , the highest point on a tree is the place where the most growth is going to occur .
A chain is a good example .
Mark - You ca n't always know why a pianting is a success , but you always know when it 's a failure .
" Most of what is called M & A today is a behemoth scooping up a much smaller rival , but this was a real merger of equals or as close to that as possible , " says Hoque .
Now , owning a newspaper is a liability .
Ethan : I want to start by thanking two groups of people : you for coming out on a hot , sweaty night -- but it 's also my first book and did n't realize until it was in print the extent to which a book is an imposition .
Doing art in a therapeutic setting together with a therapist is a different process .
" I have taken the hard road and the long road to get here , and to be going into the biggest league in the world after one full season as a manager is a real privilege .
' Growing up without a father is the most reliable indicator of poverty and all the familiar social pathologies affecting children , including drug abuse , truancy , delinquency and sexual promiscuity .
' Becoming an MP is a gradual process for me .
Woolf 's clever playing of gender , enables her to unite both gender and class together in a period were both operated seperated spheres .
A mitzvah is a commandment -- one of the taryag mitzvot , 613 commandments , relating to Jewish observance and religious practice .
That a mitzvah is the very process of forging the bond is contained within the very word mitzvah " commandment , " closely related to the word tzavta , meaning " a connection " or " a binding .
Like the estimate of child mortality itself , the standard error as observed in a survey is a sample statistic .
The answer is , a topic is a narrative minim .
This is my understanding of topics : A topic is an answer to a question of the user , which covers a mayor function of a product .
The answer to a question is the reason to read the topic .
Minim means a drop , and does that imply that a topic is a non-dividable part ?
So , in my world view , a topic is a container for narratives and a reference is a container for facts .
What Lives In A Shell Ages : 4 -8 A house is a home for you , a nest is a home for a bird , and a cave is a home for a bear .
But for some animals a shell is a home .
100 hrs a year is the minimum to increase happiness , so do about 2 hrs per week or a little more .
Losing a license is a joke .
A vaccine is the best hope to end the spread of a virus that infects nearly 15,000 men , women and children daily and threatens the survival of whole communities .
Experimenting is really important and the best experiment to know if gluten is a problem is a 30 day gluten free eating strategy .
A Bibliography is a list of ALL sources you consulted , including those you did not end up refere ...
The intensity of an earthquake is a measure of its visible effects on the surface .
The problem of the deleting of a hyperlink is an expected behavior of Outlook , it 's in the requirements .
' According to Jerome McGann , a poem is a social event - a work of literature - embedded in a dynamic , multilayered historical and ideological context .
In contrast , a text is a deanimated linguistic structure - a document - removed from sociohistorical context .
I do n't personally think a compiler is the right tool for managing the assembly of modules .
A convention is an agreed-upon way of doing things .
the integral of a sum is the sum of the integrals .
Squaring both sides of an inequality is a reversible step if both sides are nonnegative .
Losing a customer is a bad thing no matter the circumstances .
Using it to promote a cause is a lot more complicated .
If no one sets a limits on the bullying , being a bully is a seemingly succesful way to live your life .
A petabyte is the rough equivalent of 20 million 4 - drawer filing cabinets filled with text .
Manchester is a very big and well reputed university , and it will give me a chance to learn a lot being a part of the cosmopolitan culture and excellent faculty .
" As the control centre for a cell is the nucleus , we need to know how the genes in the nucleus are programmed .
The charge of a child is a serious matter , and we cannot hope that we shall not have trouble with it , but there is trouble in all things .
Those for whom the community of a team is the richest reward on offer ?
A broker is an agent of the (re)insured , and by virtue of this relationship owes him fiduciary duties 1 .
Keeping the greenhouse door open by day is a good start but an antifungal spray once a month is a sensible precaution .
" Research shows that the ones that continued to invest during a downturn are the most successful .
The governor is doing his best and when things came to a head is the issue of kidnapping which is not peculiar to Abia state alone , Lulu Abdulahi is from Kogi state his mother is still held under captivity , is it in Kaduna , it is a national thing right now .
Being a headteacher is an enjoyable , rewarding and challenging role , which really does give you the chance to change people 's lives .
They pointed out that a wedding was a serious step in our lives .
Dial a Ride is a door to door transport service for people who would have difficulty using public transport , due to disability , illness or age .
An example being the fact that the major PVC producer in question has invested in a new energy from waste plant that will take all the non-recyclable domestic waste from the Manchester area and through leading-edge recovery technology , will divert this waste from landfill and instead convert it into the energy required to run their productionunit .
A port is a number that a service runs on and well-known services have dedicated ports , so web traffic , for example , runs on port 80 .
( A Thunk is a question that makes your brain hurt and asks you to look at life from a new angle or perspective .
An omer was a measure of volume or dry measure .
A sampan is a traditional Asian boat , used by Vietnamese traders to sail the river .
Website : uriblank SocialNetwork.in Profile : uriblank A blip is a combination of 1 ) a song and 2 ) a short message that accompanies it .
A jicama is a crispy , sweet , edible tuber that looks like a turnip but has the crispness of a pear .
First , being a student-teacher is a bit like indentured servitude , except worse , because YOU 'RE PAYING to be an unpaid , full-time teacher .
Here is a photo of a model of space-time at the surface of the earth , in which we can see that a freefall is a shorter path through space-time than just standing on the ground .
Five shots to a woman is a lot more alcohol than five shots to a man .
" F " is the fundus of the uterus - a fundus is the part of a hollow organ that is farthest from its opening .
Most non-scientists seem to view a scientist 's strong claim regarding new research as a claim of absolute authority , as something that will persist through the ages , as if a scientist is a modern-day sage .
But days , notably at some time ( or maybe seriously for the exact midst ) everyone will arrive within the direction a person 's the end that do our company requirement - do not in our own right during each the risks which usually reside similar to an absolute boatload concerning hobos inside each trash can potentially totally full relating to bagels .
A campus is a place where extra care should be given to allow people to voice crazy , wild , profound , useless and useful ideas , and where counter debate can go on .
A function is a way of packaging up common code so it can be called from different places .
A function is a block of code with a function signature .
Being a writer is a very , very lonely job obviously , but these days I ca n't write in cafes because too many people come up to me and say " Are you that woman that writes that Harry Potter " ?
Building a path is a great do-it-yourself project .
The making of a horcrux is a dangerous and evil thing , one of two things Jo considers might be too horrible to explain ( the other is how Wormtail fashioned the child-like body for Voldemort ) .
A woman is a person human and parallel to a man ; a person some of whose experiences are different from a man 's ; a person socialized to the pleasures and temptations of dress-up femininity ; a person intrigued by the mythic claim to otherness in the ( so called ) " feminine " space of language .
Experiencing a flood is a devastating event .
( This problem about the location of insurance knowledge within an organization is the reason why it is a good idea to seek to have the notice provision amended by endorsement to provide that the clock does not start to run on notice issues until certain specified persons find out about a claim .
Please keep in mind , though , that such a procedure is a criminal offense in most countries .
" The difference between a flower and a weed is a judgement .
After all , a gun is an instrument of violence and carrying it openly can easily be seen as expressing an intention to coerce or threaten .
After all , the responsibility of a leader is a function of what he can know and the extent of his power .
Since this block represents a generic document section and a section is a thematic grouping of content , this one is without a doubt a tag .
A gradient is a graduated blend between two or more colors or tints of the same color or different colors .
A tint is a global process color or spot color with a modified intensity .
A swashbuckling op-ed style is evident in the deliberately provocative question that begins the piece : " Can an atheist be a good American ?
[ read-only ] Indicates whether an event is a bubbling event .
To establish a reputation was the work of a moment .
The control panel , keypad , access control sensors and an audible or visible alarm , Self Defense - Pepper Spray or Stun Gun - a Comparison are some of the basic home , Thinking about Protection ?
The best example of a slick , viral , entertaining video from a business is the " Will It Blend " series ( check out this video : uriblank ) .
A mesh is a collection of vertices that defines the shape of the object .
Generally , medical journals have high impact - a fact accepted by publishers but this does not mean they are useful in other fields -- such a use is an indication of misunderstanding .
Fred , who is also a geologist is the leading authority on Western Americana and has achieved major breakthroughs on the subject through his extensive research .
An example is the use of project builders , where an Ant buildfile is created for an Eclipse plug-in that contains predefined targets that are useful for deploying the plug-in .
The PUK meeting that lasted for under an hour was the result of a defeat in the election and the ongoing crisis in the party .
An improvement was the adoption in 1848 of a self-acying or " latch " needle which formed a loop without the aid of sinkers and pressers indispensible to the beared needle .
A chatloup is a charge from Tudor heraldry , defined as a monster with a wolf 's body , a cat 's face , and antelope 's horns .
" While a cartouche is a simple geometric charge , it is not in the center of the design .
" Since a chief is a peripheral ordinary , it is not suitable for either voiding or fimbriation .
A pulsar is a rapidly spinning neutron star that is characterized by very regular pulses of radiation ; what makes GRO J 1744 -28 unusual is that each pulse comes 20 milliseconds later than expected .
Burke 's ideal was the settled constitutionally conscribed state , and that life under such a government was the best guarantor of liberty .
We believe it does reflect a documentary form , the form [ surname ] + [ nanori ] ( a nanori is a formal name reserved to the aristography [ sic ] , according to Solveig Throndardottir , Name Construction in Medieval Japan ) .
As a change in language of an element is a major change , which the submitter does not allow , we are forced to return this name .
" The car is a form of the Tarot card The Chariot , since an automobile is a vehicle which is powered by the elements .
At the left of a thumbnail is a clip 's Media Start point , and to the right is its Media End point .
Such a database is a natural part of the Archive to be created as a part of the ADAP , but it is also something that is needed now , and plans have been made to prepare a database to serve as a guide and index to material currently available in computer form .
Sprouting a story is a way to respond to one story with a story of your own - kind of like sitting around a campfire and following the flow of conversation .
If a photon is the carrier of the electromagnetic force and a graviton is supposedly the carrier of the gravitational force , how can the gradient ( force ) of the gravitational well of a black hole be sensed if neither photons nor gravitons can escape ?
A hyperspace is a space with more than the " usual " 4 dimensions , that is 3 spatial dimensions and 1 time dimension ( the 3 spatial and 1 time dimensions are collectively referred to as " spacetime " ) .
A variety is a version or type of a plant .
This would show up as a graph looking like a long tail graph , but on a log-log scale ( whereas of course a power-law is a straight line on log-log ) .
Interfering with an officer is a misdemeanor nearly everywhere .
Thank God , finally someone who thinks being called not a lawyer is an insult .
Apparently women are still possessions , either of the state or the federal government , since damages done to women 's bodies are treated in a way were the state can subsume the position of the victim that suffered the damages .
The above would be used to drive a scientific experiment for Gosling ; for marketers , our version of an experiment is a campaign .
A brand is a promise of value , that 's all .
Whether the reporter or the newspaper also has a brand is a different issue .
And I am a content producer only in the sense that a book is an assemblage of cellulose and that a blog is a collection of jittering electrons .
Back to the ESP i think that a software is a software ... so a software , to work needs input fron the user and yoyr software asks the user 2 different inputs , the first input is said necessary to prime the system but in effect it 's an input ... i can deduct that there is a kind of first imprinting about sex differentiation ( male and female cards ) and you can store a data 50 % ? .
Since God is a substance , Spinoza argues , his existence or non-existence cannot be caused or explained externally ( Spinoza takes substances to be causally independent of each other ) ; hence , were God not to exist , he would have to be the cause of his non-existence , just as a square-circle is the cause of its non-existence .
The overall effect of a formula is the result of the synergy or alchemy created by the combination of the single herbs .
A crash is a reset .
Beyond that , the polity of a democracy is the government and should be held individually and collectively responsible for the crimes of that government .
If a seventh-rounder is the high end , unless they 're adding a round in 2015 , the only other option would appear to be zero .
The difference between a liberal and a progressive is the matter of populism - liberals lacking it ; progressives embracing it .
Shocked that I had just unknowingly told one of my favorite movie stars of all time to " calm down " and agreeing that being late for a movie is a huge pet peeve of mine , I was happy that she did n't mind my slight admonishment .
For those who are not familiar with programming let me quickly explain that the source code of a program is the human readable form of it .
A license is the list of rules what you are allowed to do with content .
A disability is an " impairment that substantially limits one or more ... major life activities .
What was a surprise was the boldface lies the VP told us at the board meeting .
Still , the difference between waiting for a machine and waiting on a machine is a sizable one .
Such a philosophy was a major reason why companies like Xerox made it a policy to donate their machines and software programs to places where hackers typically congregated .
The formal definition of a function involves two sets , which we will denote by A and B. We form pairs of elements ( a , b ) where a is an element of A and b is an element of B. A function is any subset of pairs ( a , b ) where for each a there is only one b that is paired with it .
A curve is the graph of a function if and only if any vertical line intersects the graph of the function at most one time .
But what really sells a product is the packaging .
I said I should fault myself for using the word " a lot " and a lot is an opinionated word anyways 1 , 2 , 14 , 20 could be a lot to me .
Patents : " A patent for an invention is a document granted by a government to the inventor , giving the inventor the right for a limited period to stop others from making , using or selling the invention without the permission of the inventor .
Trademarks and service marks : A trademark is a word , phrase , symbol or design , or a combination of words , phrases , symbols or designs , that identifies and distinguishes a particular product from others .
The idea that marriage is between a man and a woman is an important religious belief for many Americans .
A trigger is a specialize ...
However , the only thing that may be a concern is the file size , unless the technology ( browsers , OSs , scripts ? ) somehow ' discard ' the layers that are not in use and do n't transmit them through the wire , then it 's all good .
An object is a programmer-defined encapsulated data structure .
Illegal occupation of land with a caravan is a criminal offence in Ireland , whereas in England it is a only a civil offence .
The suffering these families will go through as a result is a bit more than you not getting a house extension !
One of the best parallels to the conundrum of a runner is the " first mover advantage " in business .
It 's an oxymoron being a " survivor / suicidal " .
Buying a phone is a challenge .
Also , being a farmer is a common trait of centenarians - which makes sense because it seem like every farmer I 've ever met is really , really old .
A sensation is a sign , then , only insofar as it suggests a perception .
A postdoc is a training opportunity in which a person who has recently completed a Ph.D. can deepen his or her expertise and research skills over a short period of time , en route to a permanent position [ Jones 2012 ] .
Request for payment for a coupon is a sure sign that you are walking into fraudulent territory .
A podium is a raised platform .
However , the most important reason for discussing what an anarchist society would look like is to ensure that the creation of such a society is the action of as many people as possible .
A cookie is a piece of data stored by a website within a browser to improve the websites performance .
Establishing a context was a point from which the scope of the strategy could be revisited as it provided a clearer picture of the institution 's priorities and could identify whether or not the Information Strategy would address these .
He stressed that although the experience as a whole was a positive one , " it was often hard living with people less fortunate [ ...
( bull ring , seafarer , crum hill , and venables road ) the only thing that passes through Northwich in a blur are the emergency services .
Sure , a poem 's a personal thing and you might well think it 's perfect , but if you put it " out there " , people are going to respond .
Was n't life so much simpler when a yob was a yob , hurling abuse , upturning prams and trampling pensioners underfoot ?
So the OED states that a ghost is a matter of belief , so anyone who ' believes ' they saw a ghost is perfectly correct in the use of the word .
The Oddschecker site , listing nearly all the major betting companies , shows Reading and Birmingham are both about equally placed to get a win - and best best for a flitter is a draw - which is somewhere between 3 / 1 and 4 / 1 .
Enable all nodes to perform high performance direct reads / writes to all clustered storage and read / write IO performance to a volume is the same from any node .
' I never wanted to be divisive or offend anyone , the Britain I have loved for over half a century is a tolerant " live and let live " nation and the verdict is a victory for those values .
The st_dev value for every filename on a system is the device number of the file system containing that filename and its corresponding i-node .
A username is a unique identifier selected or supplied by you or provided by us and is used to identify you on our Services .
An example is the zero-rating of Value Added Tax ( VAT ) on milk , bread and rice .
In professional wrestling , the term for such a character is a " heel .
It was crossed in 1976 but again until 2003 , perhaps because closing the road for a day is a big ask , even for the Tour .
The people of Astrobe do not dream at night , for a dream is a maladjustment .
We do not have an unconscious , as the ancient people had , for an unconscious is the dark side , and we are all light .
After all , the right of appeal , because of our judicial system being a three-tier system from magistracy to High Court and Court of Appeal , sometimes , confers on the accused person , the right to an appeal being an important component of a full trial .
But being a former-fantatic-vegetarian is a big part of who I am today , I guess .
Fruit platters at a wedding are a popular choice .
A monster who hunts those of its own kind is not unique ( just one recent example can be found in the TV series Angel ) , but the fact that Sister Eileen is a nun is a new twist .
Someone having gone through that experience first-hand and creating an organization is a great example of giving-back .
It feels and looks different , an example is the terra cotta roof tiles which become more prolific from here .
Being a cop is an incredibly hard job which entails risking your life and so I think their sake it is necessary to start being honest about the usefulness of the system as it is .
The appearance of a song on the Billboard chart certainly means a composition is the most popular song of a genre , but that does not , in a national sense , make that song universally popular .
An example is the Miscellaneous Statute Law ( Amendment ) Bill which we debated earlier .
A threshold is a boundary in the transition from one stable state to another stable state .
The distinguishing characteristic of a directive is the commitment by the speaker , as he asks for the ( future ) performance of some action by the hearer .
A practice is a documented approach to solving one or several commonly occurring problems .
From the end-user perspective , a configuration is a selection of method content to be published .
A button is a common user interface ( UI ) control that is used in many software applications .
For example , in the June 1952 issue of Astounding , the blurb in Theodore R. Cogswell 's " The Specter General " reads : " Normally , a colony is a fairly balanced miniature of its civilization , and acts pretty much like the civilization .
Whether science can now run with it and provide us with an answer is an open question .
For another , the number of Bachelor 's degrees produced in a year is a lagging indicator .
Modeling an image is a key component of the restoration problem .
A foundation is an entity that is established for the purpose of giving money to promote a social good .
Thus a world is a maximal proposition and the actuality of a world is the being true of a maximal proposition .
( It does not have its cause in the immediately prior instantaneous state , since there is no immediately prior state , given that time is continuous . ) Let us suppose for specificity 's sake that an instant is an instantaneous state of the universe ( relative to the cosmic reference frame ; see ( Smith , 1990 ) ) .
An interval is a set of instantaneous states of the universe .
In order to become a good analyst , starting out as an engineer is a great approach .
A prophet is an intrinsically religious figure and so , his or her being honored can only seem like a positive portent religiously .
The design of a function is a graphical description of its inputs and outputs .
Consistently , our visual representation of the logical design of a class is a box , where public parts stand out of it and private parts are entirely inside the box .
Students often do not realize that the object on which they call a method is an implicit parameter for that method .
An antivirus is the first line of defense because it will help protect your computer against most viruses , worms , Trojan horses , and other unwanted invaders that can put your computer and the data within it at risk .
Friendship is similar in that the value of a friendship is both giving and taking - it does n't work when it 's one-sided either way .
Of course a blog is a lot like housework in that there is always something to do .
A symbol is a more complex idea .
Consequently , in addition to completing handler evaluation logs for notices of violation and letters of warning , the Compliance and Enforcement Section will need to complete thehandler and evaluation sections on a separate handler evaluation log to indicate that a handler is a significant non-complier , when appropriate .
A conservative is a liberal whose been mugged ; a liberal is a conservative whose been arrested .
Remember that a label is any text you choose followed by a colon .
Macro that determines if a number is a power of two hashtagblank ISPOWER 2 ( x ) ( !
A video showing lights hovering over a pool is the talk of Naples .
A charter is a contract entered into by the DNR and an association committed to helping some group of entities participate in Green Tier .
The hash code of an instance is the sum of the hash codes of all the elements of information used in comparisons ( i.e. dimension , elements ' open type and primitive array flag ) .
If I do not draw the same conclusion , it is not because I am one of those who claim that art is exempt from moral obligations , and deny that the writing or performance of a play is a moral act , to be treated on exactly the same footing as theft or murder if it produces equally mischievous consequences .
- The decision to start a company is a lot like the decision to get married .
A placebo is an inactive pill that looks like the study drug , but a placebo contains no active medication .
Such a presumption is a fundamental proposition of clear and logical thinking .
While developing an exemplar was a secondary goal , the experience in developing the components has helped to refine the e-Framework modeling approach , its vocabularies and its recommended practices .
Some anti-alcohol groups have even gone so far as to suggest that anyone who drinks 3 to 4 drinks a week is a " heavy drinker .
A bar is a playground .
I explain it as a bonesetter being a predecessor to a modern doctor or chiropractor - so a healer .
Autographing an album is an awesome feeling , but very strange - we are modest guys .
Surely no one believes that imprisoning Americans for using a plant is a better use of our limited resources than educating our children , maintaining our infrastructure , and keeping our families safe from foreign terrorists ?
The cars most often associated with Jeffords as a driver were the " Purple People Eater " Corvettes , sponsored by Chicago 's Nickey Chevrolet .
A cipher is an algorithm for performing encryption ( and the reverse , decryption ) - a series of well-defined steps that can be followed as a procedure .
Prop Note A carbine is a short-barreled rifle that could easily be reloaded on horseback .
a mind is a terrible thing to waste !
Taking risks give adolescents heightened feelings and for some boys taking part in a mock " fight club " is the best , for other teens , covering your body with dayglow paint and dancing at a concert is a thrill .
But if the two make up , and especially if they resolve the north-south tensions in the euro area , a core is all but inevitable .
" The violin player looked at me as if I had just expressed bafflement that an orange was the color orange .
In fact , not having a plan was the plan .
It was n't nearly as funny as the season 's strongest episode yet ( The Pre-Nup ) , but Marshall 's story was intriguing and the introduction of his new career goal to become a judge was an interesting addition .
Verifying a compiler is an extremely difficult problem and verifying its entire environment ( header files , libraries , assemblers , I / O routines , etc. ) is pretty much an open problem .
To me a blog is a conversation between a company and its customers , while it is up to any company to decide how they manage customer relations .
Whether some foreign group might have wanted to exact a revenge is another matter .
" Access to a store is a huge challenge retailers must overcome , " said Pugh .
A promise is a promise , here we go .
If a company is the first to blog , lack of blogger conversations may not mean a lack of readers .
An Activity is a class that models a destination where a user can perform some action while using an app , typically via a user interface .
Adding a sprite is the most fundamental thing you can do in Sprite Kit .
Therefore , it would not be wrong to say that a person was a " Mason " if he ( or even she ) embodied the teachings of Masonry .
While one of the requirements to become a Freemason is the expression of belief in a Supreme Being , the nature of that belief is not questioned .
I also think that forcing yourself to finish a book is a bad idea because if you finish it and hate it , you 'll never return to it ; when all along the problem might have been that it was n't the right book and you were n't in the right mood that month .
A chance is all Tyson needs .
The judiciary brushed aside the question of whether a printer and a copier are the same thing , finding that the relevant violation was in using the printer to produce campaign fliers in an unauthorized manner .
Becoming a vegan is the one thing that we can all do today-right now-to help animals .
The first example of a equipment is a dumbbell .
Many people will try to tell you a transport is a transport , but when I compared my Teac Esoteric DV -50 s ( connected to the DAC 2 via a coaxial Transparent Reference Digital cable and to my PurePower with an Audience Au 24 power cord ) to the TSD 1 , it immediately became clear that transports make a big difference .
When your plans and patterns change , a simple push of a button is all it takes to get SmartThings to adapt .
Simply put , an aggregator is a piece of software designed to subscribe to sites through syndication , and automatically download updates .
The Roman Catholic religion , then , is necessary to sustain popular liberty , because popular liberty can be sustained only by a religion free from popular control , above the people , speaking from above and able to command them , - and such a religion is the Roman Catholic .
And it is time to play for nothing , so a few nuts , a drink , a sixpence , a dollar is the stake .
A hypothesis is a prediction .
If an entity is the subject of both an explicit instantiation declaration and an explicit instantiation definition in the same translation unit , the definition shall follow the declaration .
First , the discretion to determine the procedure to be followed in an investigation is a distinct and separate issue from the powers granted to the Information Commissioner when investigating a complaint .
( A deal-stopper is a bug bad enough that it must be fixed before shipping 1.0 ) .
For some systems , they just do n't tell external editors if a post is a draft or if it has been published .
All I care to know is that a man is a human being , and that is enough for me ; he ca n't be any worse .
A milestone was the design of the Altair computer , a microcomputer kit first offered in 1975 .
( b ) An object is the parent of exactly those objects in the sibling list of its child .
A censor is a censor is a censor in my book .
A project is a one time effort to meeting specific goals .
Around a dozen is the norm for me , maybe even a little less .
" And an angel was an ongoing , instrumental force driving the story .
Unlike conventional functions that return only a single result , a generator is a function that produces a sequence of zero or more results .
Prominent in his career as an artist are the regular releases of outstanding CDs .
A photograph taken of an industrial wasteland at sunset may look beautiful though we know full well that such a landscape is a blight on our beautiful earth .
It is more or less certain that the RSS leadership has concluded that Sanjay Joshi is innocent , a victim of a frame-up by a former pracharak whose relations with a woman are the cause of salacious gossip in his home state .
own border as a country is a manifestation of how deep corruption has gone in this country .
So , the issue of your wife does not arise because in every African culture , the tribe of a woman is the tribe of her husband where she is married .
Has anyone else come to the conclusion that e.g. denying Runewick getting a smelter and an anvil is the biggest ooc and ig mixing one could do , and that reducing certain primary crafts to towns is killing roleplay , logic and fun in the end ?
Tyan Masines wrote : Has anyone else come to the conclusion that e.g. denying Runewick getting a smelter and an anvil is the biggest ooc and ig mixing one could do , and that reducing certain primary crafts to towns is killing roleplay ( ... ) in the end ?
An array is a " data structure consisting of a group of elements that are accessed by indexing " according to Wikipedia .
If a signal is the input to a minimum delay system , then we can recover this signal in its original form by passing the output of the minimum-delay system into its realizable inverse system .
Because a name is a way of encompassing a concept , and the word wavelet was available from geophysics and it was powerful .
A value is a string of zero or more 8 - bit characters .
A value is a string of zero or more 32 - bit Unicode characters .
One of the most intricate energetic geometries that Stephen activated for a client is a shape resembling a round brilliant cut diamond with all 58 facets .
Spending more time with a youngster is a better use of your time .
" Perhaps , " he conceded , " things might change , and there will come a time when a war is a necessary evil , and there is no other way .
An outcome is a partnership with Jane 's in a new co-publication called the RUSI / Jane 's Homeland Security and Resilience Monitor , launched in Summer 2003 .
An example was the bizarre deployment in January 2003 of two helicopters and 150 men in the dawn raid of the Finsbury Park mosque - a venue that had been infiltrated by security agents and under stringent surveillance for several years .
An example is the CARB-mandated reduction of fuel sulfur .
The camp to us , was like living in a village were every one knew every one .
A webinar is a term to describe a specific type of web conference .
Yet we are constantly reminded that the acting profession as a whole is a demanding one .
Robin Lloyd , Experian " Running a marathon is a stupid thing to do - but if you must do it , try trading-in your brain for better legs - it worked for me !.
Check out any questions you have here uriblank Ps An odometer is the part of the speedo that records the mileage .
A 2 - bay apt - this is the single-bay domestic side ; through a door is a single-bay studio space .
It is somewhat interesting that it has a triangular shape , but a triangle is a very simple geometric shape .
A desk is a dangerous place from which to view the world .
A journal is a wonderful thing ...
A firearm is a lethal barrelled weapon of any description from which any shot , bullet or other missile can be discharged .
The birth of a calf is a very private moment for a cow and she will usually take herself off from the rest of the herd to give birth , leaving her calf hidden away in long grass for the first week or so .
Another ' tweakable ' feature of a turntable is the platter mat .
Issuing an ultimatum is the only way to get this character to reform .
So actually visiting a pound is the best way to find your missing dog , but if its not there its much more likely to not be reunited with its owners .
It is not automatic and it is not clear cut ground though , its normally used for things like mechanics fixing your car , and in fact a mortgage on a house is another form , though tightly governed by the contracts ( ie , you borrow to buy your house , if you dont pay up then they can take your house ! ) .
I have lost several doggies in my life so far , due to old age illnesses , from cancer and on the operating table but have always been asked my wishes around their burial / cremation etc. I think an explanation is the least to expect .
Its difficult ( near impossible ) to prove from a picture that a dog is a stray or even fouling as ca n't say that the owner is n't just out of frame calling them back or about to pick up the waste .
The inability of people to reach their hand down / out 2 foot to flick a switch is the reason we ca n't have nice things , but instead get landed with higher bills to pay for telling idiots to fucking switch things off .
Therefore a request not to enter a property is the same thing .
The other thing to bare in mind with a replacement is the ISV bracket .
thanks WDW for your info at the end of day a fish is a fish as long as i have a good day i really do not mind what i get on the end of my hook part from a pike i so do not like them ... lol sue It is no use telling the truth .
If a degree is a requirement then the first filter will be degree classification and anyone with a 3rd ( & , increasingly , a 2 -2 ) will be filtered out at this stage without the application letter being read .
It is very difficult for your friend , in the field they want to work a degree is the way in which you prove you have the skills and knowledge to do the job .
On the intensional interpretation , what makes ' All cats are mammals ' true is that the property of being a mammal is a component of the property of being a cat .
Jones , of Christian Science , says he personally believes " taking care of a child is a sacred responsibility .
A matrix is a rectangular array of numbers enclosed by brackets .
In 19 states attending a dogfight is a felony offense , and in 27 states it 's only a misdemeanor , punishable in some cases by just a $ 50 fine and no jail time .
Within the Coast Guard , an ombudsman is all of that and more .
The only thing he got out of his service as a soldier was a bad stomach to which may be ascribed some of the pessimism of the future critic .
All blocks on a tape are the same length .
If a bank is a stickler for details , and most are , the bank might not talk to any Tom , Dick or Harry who calls to discuss a particular short sale .
" A cookie is a small piece of information that a web site asks your browser to store .
--- John Endahl , Data Services Specialist Ingham Intermediate School District " A mind is a fire to be kindled , not a vessel to be filled .
A supernova is the explosive death of a star , which unleashes a burst of light through the cosmos .
" Once baptized or once officially received a person is a Catholic for life .
" " Do you mean that the wife , who caused you to become a polygamist is the only one of your family who receives communion ?
An exception is a Pulitzer Prize-winning work by a qualified historian comparing the Soviet and American space programs : Walter McDougall , The Heavens and the Earth ( New York : Basic Books , 1985 ) .
A cue is a conditioned event that prompts a learned response from the horse .
A shaduf is an uncomplicated apparatus consisting of a bucket , raised and lowered by a simple lever .
If the possibility of a marriage conducted by a chaplain is a benefit to employees offered in the context of that employment , a refusal to conduct such a service by a chaplain for an employee could conceivably fall foul of provisions in part 5 of the Equality Act 2010 .
Without visitor , a blog is a waste of time and money ( if you are doing premium blogging ) .
Taking a book that has had phenomenal success and transforming it into a film is a big risk , and yet Niels Arden Oplev has created a highly enjoyable movie - albeit one that occasionally pushes the boundaries of taste .
The main Java class that performs all operations to create and submit a job is the DAGCreator .
The latter is the two dimensional area of the object , which for a sphere is the same as the area of circle , pi * d 2 / 4 .
A paintball is a centrosymmetric object .
Cacambo also explained to Candide that a monkey was a quarter human , as he was a quarter of a Spaniard ( see Chapter XVI ) .
[ 8 ] A mule is the infertile offspring of mare and male ass ( or of she-ass and stallion ) .
The ability of genes or alleles to affect the representation of the host organism in a biome is an operational definition for the " function " of the gene ( in that context ) .
Commencing a company is a risky venture , but if you have a strong prepare and a wonderful merchandise , you may do just fine in today 's marketplace .
Whether the person killed initiated the confrontation and having an eyewitness were the most important factors in determining whether there was a conviction .
Except that is somehow an irregular question not to be asked , because it recognizes that bad things happen and a gun is a handy thing to have when bad things happen .
Maybe just the total cubic footage of a house is the best indicator of the amount of embodied energy expended to build it if we assume most building techniques in this country are fairly similar and a smaller structure is generally more efficient .
" Maybe just the total cubic footage of a house is the best indicator of the amount of embodied energy expended to build it if we assume most building techniques in this country are fairly similar and a smaller structure is generally more efficient .
The integral of a sinusoid is another sinusoid , not a rising curve .
If you are the kind of woman who says , " I 'm mostly friends with guys , " and act like you 're proud of that , like that makes you closer to being a man or something , and less of a woman as if a woman is a bad thing , see Item 3 .
" Haldane gives an extensive discussion of the relationship between size and function in living things , but he also addresses the problem of a giant human by supposing a human were the size of the giants Pope and Pagan in the version of John Bunyan 's The Pilgrim 's Progress that he , Haldane , had when he was a child .
Now , indeed , to produce a change is no small matter , but the change must be effected well and cautiously , and after the change the administration of food must be conducted still more so .
If a provider is a firm or corporation or a trade association , registration shall also include the names of all principal officers .
Just because a person is a scientist or an engineer or a technician or a computer programmer or an applied mathematician does not mean that she necessarily subscribes to the " scientific evidence is the only important kind of evidence " view .
A forge is a forge even if you call it a Mint and give it some kind of weird castle thing as a picture .
City elimination , simultaenous turns and a timer are all crucial aspects of Civilization 4 multiplayer .
A datatype is a kind of system library which allows the programs to read or / and write such files without having to bother about the implementation of such formats .
Such an idea is the result of a misconception about the goal and action of the holy Eucharist .
- That a cross is a cross even when you are n't the one carrying it .
The logic goes something like this : if an airplane is a machine for flying , and a bomber a machine for bombing , then the reason why houses are not looked at as machines for living is that architects have not trained their eyes to really pose the question in this manner .
( An exception is the melancholy title track ; although it 's most obviously directed at bankers , many of its lyrics - " You blew all your inheritance / And now you 're trying to pin the blame on me " - could easily be aimed at the apostate singer . ) Many of the songs contain second-person exhortations , which carry the manifest experience of having made it through the wringer .
" Wogaman 's definition of justice assumes that the laws and public institutions of a society are the mechanisms for distributing opportunity , or by contrast providing opportunity for some while denying it for others .
A child is a precious soul , to be brought up with love and discipline to know right from wrong , but there are limits to the disciplinary practices to be taken .
An assembly is a collection of common language runtime types and code .
An assembly is a means of grouping related components and , as a side effect , placing them in a namespace .
The positive view of a nexus is that progress in one of the interlinked sectors is likely to generate positive effects on the others .
Becoming a CEO is the greatest leap that an executive can make in his or her career .
A cue is a small segment of the picture , sometimes a few seconds long , sometimes a few minutes .
I 'll loop anything for union scale because a job is a job is a job .
A gyre is a large-scale circular feature made up of ocean currents that spiral around a central point , clockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and counterclockwise in the Southern Hemisphere .
A biome is a large , distinctive complex of plant communities created and maintained by climate .
Objective : Students will understand that an ecosystem is the relationship between the animal(s) and the environment .
The first sign of an allergy is an itchy , sore ear which if left untreated will develop an infection and may close the piercing site ( hole in your ear lobe ) .
Even in the very best of scenarios , renting a car is a stressful experience .
Getting to the airport and boarding a flight is a far more stressful experience today than in years past .
A translation is an interpretation .
Laying the plastic on both sides of a sheet is a little more difficult than on just one side of a board , but the results are worth it .
Is there a simple way to determine whether a board is a winner or a loser for a perfect player , aside from brute force tree analysis ?
The code given for a creature is the ammount a group of those creatures would have .
Whether a State uses a judicial or an administrative process , the only basis for a hearing is a factual mistake about the amount owed ( current , arrearage or both ) or the identity of the noncustodial parent .
A lien is a legal claim on someone 's property as security against a just debt .
An example is a paternity statute stating that if conception takes place in the State and the child lives in the State , the State may exercise jurisdiction over the alleged father even if he lives in another State .
A judgment is the official decision or finding of a court on the respective rights of the involved parties .
Interpreted musically , we might say that a proton is the result of multiple octaves of wavefronts meeting at a center , leaving detectable 1 / 3 and 2 / 3rds ratios or the 3rd and 6th note of the final , standing-wave composite of both forward and backward traveling octaves .
Subtracting a quark is the same as adding an anti-quark .
" The most common means of obtaining a job was a letter or other " self-initiated contact " with the employer ...
A prop is an object that an actor uses on stage , that can usually be carried around .
The most called upon prerequisite of a friend is an accessible ear .
A dog is the only thing on earth that loves you more than he loves himself .
all you need as a base is a shirt and black skirt or trousers .
Yashmak dancer - A yashmak is a type of veil , usually made of muslin or chiffon worn by women of the Middle East , especially Turkey .
Harem trousers and matching waistcoat , with or without a turban is the main look .
Research among restaurant diners by Barclaycard Merchant Services has suggested that the last five minutes of a visit is a key time to impress .
A crime is a crime and it makes not the slightest jot of difference if it was perpetrated 40 years ago or yesterday .
An example is the essay used as graded coursework .
Many of the other functions in Part III arise as a result of a child being a looked after child and one of the routes to a child being looked after is that the child is accommodated pursuant to s 20 .
Launching a website is a bit like opening a shop in the middle of Sherwood Forest : nobody is likely to just pass by and drop in .
Admittedly , only a couple more tracks reach the same giddy heights of that former IndieLondon single of the week but the album as a whole is a breeze and one that definitely makes required buying for anyone wanting to brighten their lives .
A home is a place you hug your wife and raise your kids .
The School were extremely lucky to play out time and a draw was a most unsatisfactory result .
In their language a mortgage is a product that they have manufactured .
A man that would expect to train lobsters to fly in a year is called a lunatic ; but a man that thinks men can be turned into angels by an election is a reformer and remains at large .--
A key feature of a patent is the demonstration that the results described are not obvious .
Another great place to turn to after a miscarriage is a support group .
Bringing the round to an end is a truly memorable closing hole , measuring 455 yards .
A baby is an alimentary canal with a loud voice at one end and no responsibility at the other .
A beard is an asset more often than not .
Anyone who knew her understood that half a century was an expandable term .
Exposure to over 100 millisieverts a year is a level which can lead to cancer .
What is a chestnut is the persistent claims made for the fleets of modern quieter aircraft that will come to replace the existing traffic .
A cheque is a ' promise to pay ' , and if payment is n't forthcoming you may sue on that promise .
Remember , admitting you 're a cunt is the first step to not being a cunt any more ...
The only people that can be friends after having a relationship are those that feel nothing romantically for each other , are no longer emotionally invested , and there has been a healthy distance between you to allow you both to move on .
If a man is an asshole , what does that say about a person that depends on the man for something personable ?
A pair of twin beds and a wardrobe were the main furnishings with a small dresser squeezed in next to the window .
They might be getting close , but they are yet to reach the tipping point of a hybrid being a better bet than a diesel for most people .
An allotment is a plot of land rented to a gardener .
Hang on , The Jam 's first single was in 1977 - a year 's a bit quick to find form , lose it then regain it , doncha think ?
Finally read the notices a Blog is a personal story memo .
A spudger is a nylon plastic " screwdriver " for prying parts apart without damaging plastic or scraping electronics .
a freind was a CES and had a talk with Samsung people .
A subsidy is a payment by a government to suppliers that effectively lowers their costs of production .
A file is a file is a file .
Some files are often best treated in a special manner by DOS , with an ^Z being a terminating character ( maybe only if in the last sector or last 128 bytes ) .
The very act of offering an apology is an act of atonement for the wrong done .
An apology is a Levinasian moral move ?
That seems a bit harsh ; but there is something self-indulgent about confession : whereas the person who benefits from an apology is at least supposed to be the one who receives it ; the person who primarily benefits from a confession is the one who makes it .
Architect Derek Latham 's observations as a visitor are another reminder of the special quality of this living heritage .
A market is any place that brings together buyers and sellers with a view to agreeing a price for exchange .
A proxy is an object that substitutes for the target object .
45 A tsunami is a high wall of water moving across the ocean at speeds that can exceed 700 kilometres per hour .
( Old Testament : Ezekiel 44:18 -19 ) Turban as an Honour The highest honour that a Sikh religious organization can bestow upon an individual is a Siropa .
Obviously the information gained from a borehole is an extremely limited picture of the subsurface structure .
The judge at Salisbury Crown Court ( Mr Recorder Davies QC ) , after hearing legal arguments , ruled that a wet-bike is a ship ( which under s .313 of the Act " includes every description of vessel used in navigation " ) .
Child Support Act 1991 S .55 ( 1 ) For the purposes of this Act a person is a child if ( a ) he is under the age of 16 ; ( b ) he is under the age of 19 and receiving full-time education ( which is not advanced education ) by attendance at a recognised educational establishment ...
Bringing forward a proposal for the closure of a school is a very serious matter and certainly not one that is taken arbitrarily .
Bringing forward a proposal for the closure of a school is a very serious matter and one where there is a need to consider carefully each case on its merits .
16.6 Special Community A school is a special community of children , not a collection of buildings .
The idea that it ever was a consultation is a fction and you should not participate in this act .
You could call it restricted advice but a sale is the correct term .
A thermosyphon is a method of passive heat exchange based on natural convection .
2.3 An agent is an autonomous entity which observes and acts upon an environment according to the information it carries and receives .
Instead , the only issues on which teachers were prepared to take a stand were the supervision of school lunches and the twenty quid subscription to the GTC .
Converting a bankruptcy from a chapter to a chapter is the right of any debtor on if i go from to chapter and still won t to keep my .
Thus , the form of a religion is a societal effect .
Again , the form of a society is an effect of religion .
A boiler is a closed vessel in which water or other fluid is heated .
After 20 years it had come back only much worse , I could n't think why , my only contact with an allergen was the wood pigeons that had recently moved into our garden .
Now you say 8 for a penny was a rip-off .
The assumptions inherent in the funding criteria are that a disability is a permanent and largely inherent characteristic of the student .
When a woman has spent her entire life believing that having a baby is the most natural thing in the world , then an inability to fall or stay pregnant may well cause feelings of failure to rise up and overwhelm her .
HI , a fuse is a safety device that protects the circuit , it either works or its blown , the distance you try to activate it is neither here or there where the fuse is concerned .
A novel usually has to be condensed to make an opera libretto , but a poem is another matter : for Schumann 's purposes Uhland 's ballad has to be expanded .
yachts for sale , Apart from moving home , buying a boat is the most considerable life investment that you are likely t ...
Mechanism [ biology ] In biology -- and in science in general -- a mechanism is a complex object ( system ) or , more generally , a process that produces a regular phenomenon .
By contrast , part-exchange with a developer is a widely accepted and clear-cut option .
Once a dog is an adult the tail is amputated - not docked - docking is / was done as 48 hr old pups .
If I can draw a comparison from the horse world .. comparing the Sloughi / Saluki type sighthounds wtih a Greyhound is a bit like comparing the Arab horse to a solid chunky National Hunt style Thoroughbred - sure they are both built for speed but one is remarkably more refined than the other !
A judge is an excellent judge because she accepts bad eyes .
There 's no gastro-pretentiousness here - a pie is a pie - it 's not a puff pastry vol-au-vent stuffed with a ham and saffron velouté accompanied by a timbale of mushrooms and okra .
But you get what you pay for , and a hellebore is a long-lasting , beautiful plant that , critically , performs from late winter through to mid-spring when there is not an awful lot else going on .
If all is well with the remote you will hear a click as the radio picks up the signal from it :) As Doug says , a test with a radio is a sure way to check that an RF fob is transmitting a signal , the Red battery indicator only proves that the battery is good , it does n't prove the fob is transmitting a signal .
The only reason I knew it was a spider was the word " spider house " .
A gene is a section of DNA in which are ' written ' the details of one substance , called a protein .
Also remember if you have a lot of text you do n't want indexed , which is part of a site disclaimer or some other common static text then an image is the best way to reduce duplicate content .
Persuading people to look at rescue instead of buying a pup is a struggle sometimes - there is a perception that all rescues are ' full of Staffies - even a glance at some websites is enough to put people off looking any further .
What is n't a joke is the behaviour of Huth studding Suarez in the chest which happened right in front of me , not on a TV highlights show , but of course Tony boy is n't interested in the potentially dangerous behaviour of his own players , only the underhand behaviour of others .
A fan is the best method .
A conversation is a lot different if you can hear someone 's tone of voice or see the expression on their face is it not ?
I personally do n't think a trial is a good idea either as once you have the dog in situ you may not be able to part with him even if it is n't really working out .
The legality of a swindle is a very important thing to get right from the start , so the educated lawyers were contracted for the legalisation of the scam .
A baby is a wonderful addition to the family and Baby 's first year is filled with new experiences .
" Surprisingly , everyone believed that , maybe because an assault was the most horrible scenario , hard to digest .
An example was a semi detached house .
But an interview is an interview .
I am also applying for a library assistant at a secondary school which would fit me better , but a job is a job .
A hacker is a very smart citizen , hacking through a relatively simple defense mechanism ; but we must be very simple human beings transforming a very complicated world of endless possibilities .
The capacity of a pack is the capacity of the lowest cell .
An op-amp is the usual answer .
I know that a workaround is to use speech voices instead , but a workaround is a workaround and this is n't a good one either .
In their own time when they are not accepting tax payers money to do a job is that time .
And while we are on the subject , when did it come to pass that keeping a mistress was a bad thing .
Extrapolating from switching a lamp to switching an audio signal is not so ridiculous , if you have only been taught that a transistor is a switch .
Someone asked how would you tell if a woman was a prostitute .
Time was when a service was a fixed price , quoted up front and including consumables .
My dealer was second best , , that did not stop them from telling one of their customers with a 2 year old SL that he bought from them new that it was normal for the battery to be flat after 3 days and he should use the key to unlock the car , only with my intervention as a bystander was the car taken in .
What I 'm trying to say is from limited travel and watching the media , it does n't seem that countries without a monarchy are any fairer or offer more opportunities for social mobility than the UK does .
The only difference between myself and a client is the client goes and pays a girl to have sex , were as I will go out to a club or pub etc , meet a girl , get talking and take her home and have sex .
For me , a striker is the central player , focus of the team 's attack , either by grabbing the goals or being the reference point .
I have to say , as a general observation rather than a personal criticism , that this kind of attitude that implies that it 's the passenger 's fault for having the temerity for wanting to use a service is a big part of the reason why public transport in this country is a laughing stock .
Just want to ask one question does a man being a well educated , worked in a high profile job , and speaking well furnished English must not be punished when he does wrong .
In professional terms , it 's easy to see why knowing how to put together a program is a valuable skill : more and more jobs require some technical know-how , and the most skilled students have glittering prospects ahead of them .
I liked that little point you put in about having been citizens ' far longer ' ... a citizen is a citizen , i do n't care how long they 've been such .
If such a coordination were a matter of physically reproducing each sensory representation into one large , master conscious representation at a single spot in the brain , then one would expect there to be a single spot that housed all and only conscious sensory representations .
The minimum requirement for having a concept of a thing is the ability to individuate it , to separate it from its surround .
I did see the film but comparing a live and filmed version of a play is an apples and oranges proposition .
For people recently dealing with vision loss , having the confidence to independently cross an intersection is a huge accomplishment .
A Paragraph is a list of Commands .
A Term is a kind of Value and thus is a formula for something than can be stored in a variable .
An earthquake is a sudden , rapid shaking of the Earth caused by the breaking and shifting of rock beneath the Earth 's surface .
Questions : Q : One problem with collaboration via a medium is the security of the medium of the collaboration .
Creating , updating and maintaining a manual is a most important task , not many people can remember all the key bindings or how to articulate a certain part of the simulation .
An example is the problem with designing burner controls on an electric stove so that you know without thinking which control goes to which burner and its state .
A grant is a sum of money given to an agency or individual to address a problem or need in the community .
Color a sound is an installation that uses an overhead projector and a camera to create an inverse color organ that can be played like a player piano .
A tribuneship was a dangerous post because its holder was often in conflict with powerful nobles , but for an ambitious man it was the quickest way to success .
Look at the language in 155 : " clear and unequivocal , " " critical distinction , " etc. But the world works as a series of concrete multiplicities : a person or a party is a site of clashing forces ; the role of the historian is to describe the quality and relative strength of those forces and identify the tendency the system is heading in .
What you have as a result is a restraint on freedom , expression , and free speech .
An algorithm is a clearly described procedure that tells you how to solve a well defined problem .
A heap is a binary tree structure ( each node has two children ) that has the big items on top of the small ones ( parents > children ) , and is always balanced ( all branches have nearly equal lengths ) .
As they show time and again , the utter falsehood of a statement is no barrier to Republicans repeating it .
That to the Indians this drawn series seemed as good as a win is a tribute to how good Sri Lanka are at home .
In the minds of most people a railroad was a business , precisely like any other business , and the modern notion that it was " affected with a public interest " and that the public was therefore necessarily a partner in the railroad business had made practically no headway .
The NSA 's spying on citizens without a warrent is an affront to all Americans .
And the sicker a man was the longer it held him , and if a man who was not sick put it in his mouth , it would not hold him at all , much or little .
Still , a cabaret is a cabaret , not a beggars ' opera , and a touch of glitz would not have been out of place .
For now a shape is an area that is separate from other areas and / or its background .
An anthem is a song or hymn of praise or gladness .
I do n't really see any difference between whether it 's a film or a movie in so much as a job is a job .
In the Writings it is stated that a wife is the love of her husband 's wisdom .
a resonance is a resonance .
In this paper , a Deaf academic and her interpreter / colleague discuss various challenges in having an interpreter-and being an interpreter-in academia .
A well is a water source that ( if constructed correctly ) will not freeze in the coldest weather , and should last in hot .
My first commissioned painting of a dog was a Bedlington Terrier ; I must admit that after the first day 's work I thought it was going to be a disaster , but with fresh eyes the next morning I realised I was beginning to develop a technique , something I have been refining ever since .
I guess a cabin is a cabin anywhere , right ?
A tree is a tree , a dog is a dog , a man is a man .
With limited exception , the provision of legal services to a party is a contribution .
According to the statutory definition , a contribution is a gift of services " for which charge is ordinarily made .
Getting a ride is a combination of politeness and luck .
" You 're absolutely right that buying an extended warranty for a toaster is a bad idea , but the cartoon book repeatedly emphasizes low probability outcomes that are catastrophic , which is a pretty good focal point for insurance .
Note that a DCAP is a generic construct for designing metadata records that does not require the use of metadata terms defined by DCMI [ DCMI-MT ] .
A DCAP is a document ( or set of documents ) that specifies and describes the metadata used in a particular application .
Adding the [ CHILD : 1 ] to a creature is a relatively easy mod , but sex changes require the application of a transformational syndrome and possibly changing the creature from an egg-layer to a live-birther .
For me a link is a binary relation in its nature , which can be type ( if its not typed , then we have at least one type ;) ) .
" The reporting requirement for wells within 1,000 feet of an interstate is a step we in Louisiana have taken above and beyond what we have seen in other states ' regulation of oil and gas drilling , " Welsh said .
DB 's Response : BE : I agree that a letter is the best way to approach the first contact with someone .
A rule 's a rule .
A duvet is a thick quilt , traditionally stuffed with goose or duck down , nowadays more commonly filled with cheaper artificial fibres .
" I WANT THE GLORY " Copyright © 1999 The Providence Journal Company March 28 , 1999 " Jack McGee of Pawtucket was a test pilot in the days when just climbing into a plane was an act of faith .
A desert is any region that receives too little rain and too much sun , produces too little vegetation , or is too cold to support a human population .
Of course , after knocking , the muzzle of a gun is the first thing you 'll see , but after you give the password you 'll be rushed right through .
I think a man 's a damn fool to try to decide whether or not a woman should have an abortion .
Normally , for me , planting a tree is an act of optimism and experimentation .
In the measure in which a sermon is a human production , it is not ' a good sermon .
Posts authors last post apr a mortgage also known as a note is a lien recorded against lean on a mortgage the property not an individual guaranteeing the payment of the debt the .
An example is the fish leech ( Hemiclepsis ) that attaches to the skin in order to feed on blood .
A tumour is an unnatural growth that sometimes develops on skin or within the fish 's tissues or organs .
A woman kneeling in front of a man during a prayer is a distraction .
Women leading men in a prayer is a new oddity .
And when we assert that a barrister is no lawyer , or that a military officer is no soldier , we do not question that the one was duly " called , " or that the other holds his Majesty 's commission .
A partner is an equal , a 50 per cent shareholder : a view of marriage that is completely irreligious .
Context in Glasgow Presented our work on context modelling in Glasgow to the mobile HCI audience - only a short talk so that the 2 takehome messages were : metaphor for context - treat it like a flim , with an overall theme and historical context as well as a scene and elements in a scene - with a frame being the instantaneous set of environmental readings that we actually want to use .
What I think would be more useful , in a way , than a meta-judge is a panel of critical friends .
A competition is an enduring and pervasive fact of business life ( McAleese , 2004 ) .
Predatory pricing in a market is a good example of abuse of dominant position where the firm sells at below incremental costs / average variable costs / " avoidable cost " ) with the objectives of driving out competitors .
The idea of a concert was a good one but for me the whole thing was a farce .
Music appeals to , and controls , our emotions in a very powerful way and either listening to music as a group or , particularly , singing songs or playing music as a group is a fantastic way of synchronising the types of emotions each of us are experiencing and whipping them up into an intensity that might be difficult to achieve by an individual in isolation .
Visually Requiem For A Dream is a stunning movie - it really is unlike anything else that you will ever see .
He is absolutely right that all neighbourhoods differ , so the only people who can make such an assessment are those on the ground , who know the natural set of connections between people locally .
Fiona Bruce ( Congleton ) ( Con ) : As trading from a property within an area is a criterion for standing as a local councillor , should there not equally be such a qualification for involvement in a neighbourhood forum ?
Note - a certificate is an authenticated version of a public ke cover letters and business forms with free samples to demand collect receive and accept the proceeds thereof in cash or in check and if in check to .
In the land of spicy gumbo and sugary beignets , an indictment is a badge of honor almost certain to guarantee re-election see former louisiana gov .
Performing analysis on a model is a proven method in understating uncertainty of a situation , problem or a project .
The real world situations are much more complicated so capturing them in a model is a daunting task .
A mate was an accountant working on prison accounts .
Mr Hill : I did not say I should avoid use of emotive language because if a subject is an emotive subject , I see no reason why I should not use emotive language .
Brilliant , well worth going to see - stall seats by an isle are the best as all the animals walk up on to the stage .
The large display in the school hall saying ' A smile is a universal language ' reflects the optimistic buzz found at Glebe .
5.16 If a woman is a carrier of mitochondrial disease , oocyte nucleus transfer might offer the possibility of preventing its transmission to her children .
Changing from a product with a known content to an unknown is a serious error .
Perhaps an ancestor was a Famous Highwayman or are related to a member of the Royal Family .
In general a smithy was a seperate building .
Nor must we have any misgiving , now that we possess Christ , about our ability to advance rapidly in virtue , for with God all things are possible , " and to become a saint is the reason for our creation .
in 3 - factor authentication paradigm : • something you know • something you have • something you are a password is a single factor , shared-secret , something you know authentication .
instead of having a convention were an address was loaded from storage location and used immediately as an effective address ... have a convention where the storage location value is treated as a displacement ... that needs to be combined with some register value to from an effective address ( in a manner analogous to what instructions do ) .
Lighting a fire in the open without a permit is an offence and can bring a penalty of over $ 17,000 and / or 12 months imprisonment .
An environment is a collection of computers in which each computer has an assigned role .
A silencer is a component of a firearm used ...
To Beguile a Beast is the third entry in your Legend of the Four Soldiers Series .
The winner of the last trick of a hand is the new banker and considered winner of this hand , although the only real objective is to make money .
A loggerhead was an iron bar with a bulb or ball on the end which was heated in the fireplace and used to heat drinks .
It does seem like a wheelabrator is a bit agressive , but if you go to the website Daveb posted , uriblank , you can see that all they make is furniture , and from pretty small profiles , too , so I would guess they have it figured out .
A sink is a material e.g. , carpeting , wallboard ) that can absorb chemicals from the air ; the absorption can be either reversible or irreversible .
An intake is a conversation to discuss what worked or did not work in the past as well as developing new resources and strategies for the college environment .
" The death of a spouse is the most significant stressor anyone can have , " said Dr .
The magnifing mirror , like in a telescope is a small portion of a sphere or a parabolic shape .
Of Drifts and Hammer Handles : A drift is a tool like a tappered punch that is used to shape a hole .
But , their torrid kissing after being threatened by a baddie was a bit much .
Have no idea why , but the only thing I like less than a blonde is a red-headed hero .
A bit is the smallest unit of information .
Choosing a college is an important decision , and one of the considerations is whether to choose public or private , secular or religious .
Choosing a college is the first step in higher education .
A landscape picture is longer than it is high , a portrait is the opposite .
Barrow Also known as a tumulus , a barrow is a mound of earth placed over one or more graves ; a burial mound .
Dividing the time between a solstice and an equinox is a cross quarter day , also known as a fire Sabbat as they feature bonfires .
In French , a psyché is a full length mirror that can be turned at will to reflect what stands at different angles before or behind it .
our concept of an object is a concept of something public , an inhabitant of a shared world , something that can equally well and simultaneously be the common focus of your and my attention .
The idea of a soul is an idle wheel in the explanation of self ; accepting or rejecting it does no work in accounting for the facts of selfhood .
JUDY VALENTE : How can anyone determine with certainty that a man is a homosexual ?
A patent is a contract between the Government and an inventor whereby , in exchange for the inventor 's complete disclosure of the invention , the Government gives the inventor the right to exclude others from making , using , or selling the invention .
An example is the Castle , which costs three of the most rare and valuable Kopins .
" One of the signs which has become a trademark of being in a dream is the inability to read the written word or at other times to decipher numbers on a clock face or elsewhere .
But me , I ca n't help but think instead about the traditional , religious meaning of the term : a godfather is the man who takes personal responsibility for the moral growth of a child .
An example of a model is a power function with negative slope or a negative exponential function .
Making those ambitious goals a reality is the role of their Distributed Health Labs , a collaboration between UC San Diego 's School of Medicine and the Qualcomm Institute , the UC San Diego division of the California Institute for Telecommunications and Information Technology ( Calit 2 ) .
There is a lot of good synthy stuff in places but I thought that a lot was a bit sloppy in the way of things that should not really be there ... hiss , clicks and tick .
Sure an Ax might make you feel manly , but in many conditions , particularly when it is wet outside , or you are tired , an ax is a one-way ticket to the hospital .
So the book I was thinking of is " The Grasshopper " by Bernard Suits , which apparently argues that " playing a game is the voluntary attempt to overcome unnecessary obstacles " - discussed here and here .
A granita is a frozen , shaved ice dessert that is simple to make and very refreshing .
An example is the bear puzzle ( a character whose presence is yet another echo of Adventure ) .
A higurashi is a common type of cicada in Japan .
A decorator is a callable object ( like a function ) that accepts one argument-the function being decorated .
A decorator is a function ( such as foobar in the above example ) that takes a function object as an argument , and returns a function object as a return value .
A decorator is a function - a different animal altogether .
A decorator is a function that accepts a function object as an argument and returns a function object as a return value .
You should start by saying a decorator is a pattern .
You decide to start by saying that a decorator is a pattern .
You write " A decorator is a function ( such as foobar in the above example ) that takes a function object as an argument , and returns a function object as a return value .
" A decorator is a function which takes a function as an argument and returns a value - any value .
A rushlight was a dried rush soaked in grease and held upright on a metal support .
Hiding the first of your 4 Pylons in a corner is a good idea since he may miss it if he kills the other 3 , or if he does try to kill it , he 'll have to waste a lot of precious time to do so .
Therefore , because a person says a thing is no reason that he says true .
Tramiel , who at some fundamental level still thought of the computers he now sold like the calculators he once had , failed to grasp that the whole value of a computer is the ability to do lots of different things with it , to have lots and lots of options its designers may never have anticipated , all through the magic of software .
It is prone to crashes but this isnt a major issue , what is a issue is the appauling battery life .
Creating , developing and maintaining a brand is a long-term process and can be expensive .
well done mickey , when i watched the video and you revved it the alternaotor looks close to the top hose , looks mm away when the blocked rocked side to side , you dont want that eating through the top hose Your right it is close , but a clearence is a clearence right ?
We 're fitted as much as possible and have a working cooker , dishwasher etc , but still no fridge freezer to keep things cool / fresh - bear in mind this is June as well and a fridge is an essential - for the beers if nothing else !
The replacement of a kitchen is the worst experience I 've known in decorating / upgrading terms .
Terry Roper , of Claymond Road , Barton , warned the lack of a crossing is an " accident waiting to happen " .
A bond is a form of debt like a loan or IOUs .
Had I been told , I would not have voted for either , since to be party to such an arrangement is a negation of democratic principles .
In such a hugely competitive sector it is often impossible to differentiate between financial products and services , and recognition and trust in a brand is a vitally important issue .
An obituary is a published notice of a person 's death .
Placing decals in a level is a simple way to break up uninteresting textures , as well as bring together various level elements like brushes and terrain .
If a pet , family member , or friend dies when a child is this young , she may question when the dead person is going to come back .
A small jig tipped with grass shrimp under a bobber is the ticket in some of the narrower waters and a bottom rig baited with bloodworms is a good choice in the more open waters farther down the rivers or creeks when fishing from shore .
After all if a disease is a just punishment from a moral authority , who are we to gainsay that ?
Khalid did n't have to borrow former British PM Harold Wilson 's famous bon mot of " a week is a long time in politics " , but he was close to expressing astonishment that so much could have changed in so short a time .
There was once a time when a bankruptcy filing by a company was a mark of shame .
A democrat is a democrat , is a democrat no matter what color dog he represents .
An attribute is a key / value pair , identified by the key .
I hope that anyone contemplating giving a heifer for Christmas actually knows that a heifer is an animal .
In some cases a bottle is the only way .
Perhaps they feel that the mental effect of a loss of a child is a natural-thus-healthy thing .
A tag is a non-hierarchical keyword , also described as metadata : it is not displayed on the product page as it does not bring any useful information , but it can prove very useful when building thematic lists - such as a tag-cloud , where the most common tags are written in a bigger font than the rarer ones .
A category is a hierarchical way of sorting items : it can contain any number of sub-categories , making it possible to easily browse from the more general category listings to the more specific products by following a logical path .
Almost all the parties noted that a dispute resolution process was not included in the Joint Staff documents , and argued that such a process was a critical component of the EM & V cycle .
A charter is a contract entered into by the DNR and an association committed to helping its members participate in Green Tier .
Small bead-head nymphs fished under an elk-hair caddis as an indicator is an effective way of catching the wily brown trout in the Savage River during the summer .
The struggle against communism as an ideology is a quite separate thing in my mind , and still is , from the struggle against the Soviet Union as an imperial superpower , which was n't in fact able to use its agents and supporters in other countries to any such effect .
A position is a group of duties and responsibilities assigned by the appointing authority that are designed to be performed by a full-time or part-time individual , or the part-time employment of two or more individuals , and which is authorized and designated by a position control number ( PCN ) .
The Board reaffirms that a resignation in order to avoid facing charges which lead to a discharge is a voluntary suit , and that there are no valid circumstances associated with the voluntary suit .
The inspection provides an opportunity for staff to explain and discuss environmental problems with facility representatives and perhaps to resolve problems or improve operations and , where a problem is a violation , to achieve compliance .
TubeSites : Drag-and-Drop Web Site Creation : A tubeSite is a private website that Tubes creates automatically for each tube .
A win is a win and we will get better , there were signs of it today !
I would have thought buying a diesel is a false economy if the car is only going to do 2000 -3000 miles a year .
First for information I copied the wikipedia-entrance about chakra : Anodea Judith ( 1996 : p .5 ) provides a representative modern interpretation of chakras : A chakra is a center of activity that receives , assimilates , and expresses life force energy .
Hi everyone , me and a friend are both 18 and are planning our trip around Europe between 28 / 05 / 09 - 26 / 06 / 09 so for 30 days .
The decisive factor in such a struggle is the balance of forces within the state mechanism .
moss : Because apparently whispering on a mailing-list is all they have to do .
We believe that a person is a person through other persons , that my humanity is caught up , bound up , inextricably , with yours .
- The paperwork for a job is A LARGE part of the job so sign for what you 've done and never sign for something you have n't done - especially supervision !
I know we 're all feeling the festive spirit at the moment but to see JP turn the show into a pantomime was a farce .
We have often spoken of a laya-center , a laya-center being the seventh or highest degree of matter ( or the first degree of spirit ) , the vanishing-point of matter into higher realms , the nirvana of matter , the nirvana of any entity of which it is the heart , the center .
A haiku is a poem made up of three phrases with five , seven , and five syllables respectively .
But inochi in the form of a particle and inochi in the form of a stream are the same thing , not different objects .
A thought is a thing : it is a living entity .
The daily dosage has been studied extensively , the twice a week is the new kid on the block .
An afterburner is an additional section at the end of a jet engine into which additional fuel is burned to provide a boost in thrust .
Treasury would have the authority to decide whether to resolve a failing firm , after consulting with the President , the FDIC , and the Fed ( or the SEC if a broker-dealer is the largest subsidiary of the failing firm ) .
A quarter is a quarter pound .
The range of speeds over which the flow velocity over a body is a mixture of subsonic ( i.e. less than Mach 1 ) and supersonic ( i.e. greater than Mach 1 ) is called transonic .
A cookie is a data file placed on a Device when it is used to visit the RS Application .
There is greater potential for mischief when a node incorrectly thinks a host is a router , than the other way around .
As we read in The Secret Doctrine , an atom is a soul .
A soul is an entity which is evolved by experiences ; it is not a spirit , it is a vehicle of the spirit .
" A laya-center is that part of an entity , of an atom which , being relatively homogeneous substance , matter " dissolved " into homogeneity , allows ingress and egress for passing consciousness and consciousnesses .
A laya-center is the channel , the point , the disappearing-point , the neutral center , in matter or substance , through which consciousness passes - and the center of that consciousness is the monad .
If we were to say that an atom is a god , we would say wrongly .
A tree is a sensitive thing .
Earning an award is a tremendous achievement for a researcher , but it also helps to secure continued funding when cited on grant applications , says Tom Barber , manager of grants and government research contracts in the research office .
The only parts of those curves that will visually look anything like stops on a pc screen or a print is the linear part of each curve .
A tripod is a bad tipoff , but if it 's not aluminum , like anodized black metal , is less noticeble .
Accepting an offer is a commitment to the employer who made you the offer .
An example is a randomised trial of powerful magnetic bracelets for the relief of hip and knee osteoarthritis , which reports a significant decrease in pain because of the bracelets .
You might be inclined to think that being part of a group is a secondary aspect of our humanity .
One specific area where funding is a problem is the Dependently Handicapped Summer Program .
That is , a book is any four-of-a-kind .
As much as our goverment is problem we as a society are a problem all we care about self is enrichment , and we look down on those who are not doing as well as us.I work in a white enviroment no matter what you say the people around me only care about themselves and think they deserve better that people they think is an inferior race .
A boer is a person who is white - A farmer is a boer and most are white .
Vocoder - A vocoder is an audio processor that captures the characteristic elements of an an audio signal and then uses this characteristic signal to affect other audio signals .
Though a few Edo artists , such as Sakai Hoitsu ( 1761 -1828 ) , were born to aristocratic , samurai families , for whom becoming an artist was a step down the social ladder , others , such as Katsushika Hokusai ( 1760 -1849 ) , started out as floating world artists .
" A song is a vocal behavior used in male-male interactions and in courtship of females , and in most songbird species , only the male sings .
Just because the food delivery system in one case is a female breast is n't the mother 's problem - it 's the problem of anyone for whom an accidental glimpse of a breast is a cause for complaint .
A cookie is a small text file that is placed on your hard disk by a web page server .
A company is a formalised social structure , like a family .
The creation of issues like Indus Water and converting it into a dispute is a typical Pakistani trait .
Here are a few sure-fire signs a candidate is a true outsider : He is disliked , even loathed , by members of his own party ( rumor has it that Sen .
... and though it 's tempting to read this episode of sexual aggression lightly because of the gender reversal of popularly accepted roles , sexual assault is a bad , bad thing , not made any more innocuous by the fact that a woman was the aggressor in this instance .
Did you know that a serpent is a messenger of wisdom to certain indigenous peoples ?
Among the commonly accepted duties of a government is the responsibility to protect its residents from harm .
A second was that mild , subtle cognitive and behavioral impairments are often present in ALS and may have a negative impact on social interactions and communication .
One Victorian scientist who was eager to study infants was Charles Darwin , who wrote one of the first " baby biographies " -- diaristic examinations of a baby 's every burp and grasp .
A cookie is a small text file that is stored on your computer 's hard drive and that often includes an anonymous unique identifier .
Holding a conversation is the reason for language so you are doing great !
Learning Spanish - or any other language , for that matter - as an adult is no easy task , but if you want to learn it , it 's completely doable .
Second , the most fundamental part of a culture is the language .
With love ... a baby is never an issue ... but through force or other issues a baby is a huge problem ...
An ideal is a principle or value that we pursue as a goal in life .
Riding a motorcycle or a scooter is an exhilarating experience .
An Objective statement at the top tells what I am seeking from a job ; a Summary is a compact statement of qualifications the employer might find useful .
One person with a belief is a social power equal to ninety-nine who have only interests .
A miracle is the supreme manifestation of the victory of the spirit over physical causal necessity .
A quark is a building block of larger particles such as protons and neutrons .
Paying over $ 3 a gallon is a lot , and I expect it will reach much higher this year .
Growing out a beard may be cheap ( if time-consuming ) , but purchasing a suit is no small matter .
That does n't mean that an ultra-hawkish pitch is the way to their hearts , but it makes it harder to claim that such a pitch is a sure way of losing their votes .
A blockade is an act of war .
One thing we do in our club , a couple of times a year is the " reverse meeting .
For the purposes of this paper , a word is a sequence of letters , delimited by nonletters .
Some may sidestep this fact by " manufacturing " an arc under the guise of role playing , but such a thing is a far cry from " sincere " breakthrough moments a character may make in other media .
You might as well be going to swimming pool salesman in Alaska and ask if building a pool is a good idea ...
The same campaign runs at all 1,051 Starwood hotels , and there 's no need to worry about currency value , since a point is a point , no matter the country .
Not only that , such a setup is a nightmare to maintain .
A sprain is a stretch and / or tear of a ligament , the fibrous band of connective tissue that joins the end of one bone with another .
A strain is an injury of a muscle and / or tendon .
There , a divorce is a big thing .
What might in fact be most interesting about Wikipedia as an organization is the way it has evolved , as it has pursued its goal of matching the quality of Encyclopedia Britannica , toward a more traditional editorial , and even corporate , structure .
In the simplest sense of the word , a map is a spatial representation of something .
Reverend Carl Johnson told D ' Oench after the meeting with Orosa that " This chief even though he is a cop is a cop with compassion .
A certificate is a data structure that contains information about the organisation .
" Where we 're getting our food from and how we 're going to feed a population is a huge conservation issue , " she says .
A plaque is a clear area which results from the lysis of bacteria ( Figure 4 ) .
One approach is to seek discovery of Argentina 's worldwide assets ; whether a U.S. court can make such an order is the subject of the first Republic of Argentina v. NML Capital case , argued to the U.S. Supreme Court in April .
When you favor the death penalty , and yet claim to be a follower of Jesus , who said an eye for an eye was the old way , not the way of the kingdom , you are doing something immoral .
And believing that one has never made a mistake is the mark of a deluded man , not a man of faith .
A medianstinoscopy is a procedure in which a tube ( a mediastinoscope ) is inserted through the chest wall to examine the area between the lungs ( the mediastinum ) .
The motivation of a character is a crucial part of acting .
I meant that the winner in a confrontation is the one that has violence used against them .
Hydrogen , much like a battery is a storage device , not fuel .
uriblank I can say for a fact is the major oil company which I work for is installing new lines for refining Algae .
The eminently quotable Twain had this to say about Photography , as taken from twainquotes.com : " A photograph is a most important document , and there is nothing more damning to go down to posterity than a silly , foolish smile caught and fixed forever .
A vDC is a fully-isolated virtual infrastructure environment where a Group of users , under the control of the vDC admin , can create and manage compute , storage and networking capacity .
The publishers ' calculation is that since free access after a year is a foregone conclusion , because of Green mandates , it 's better ( for publishers ) if that free access is provided by publishers themselves , as Delayed Gold , so it all remains in their hands ( archiving , access-provision , navigation , search , reference linking , re-use , re-publication , etc. ) .
A journal is a peer-review manager and copy-editor ( the peers -- qualified , answerable specialists -- chosen by the editor , review for free ; the editor adjudicates the reviews and the author revisions ) 2 .
I do n't think wiki-izing a spreadsheet is a necessary step in the path twoards the kind-of full-on hypertext spreadsheet I am imagining .
In legend , an incubus is a male Demon that prays on women at night .
14 1 Moreover , one 's sons are to be kept from foul p 47 language ; for , according to Democritus ,21 " A word is a deed 's shadow .
An environment is a mapping from variable names to their values and will be covered in depth in the next section .
In this section , what we mean by a theory is a type theory without dependent types , but with a dependent logic .
Writing freely about a topic is a process which demonstrates understanding and grasp of the material involved .
Buying from a dealer is the safest way of buying as you get the maximum protection of the law .
There are companies that can tell you whether a car is an insurance company write-off .
We note that a stereoscope is an instrument capable of recording three-dimensional visual information .
As Aberdeen City Councillor Neil Fletcher clarified in comments to the BBC : " We think a by-law is the only way we can remove these people from the centre of town .
' But how false a view is this !
Yes sweet heart ... just one day at a time is all you can do in addition to praying for strength ...
A fogou is an underground passage , completed in stone and covered with earth .
Because it is always when the most important is a question is a question of an order of the state , of an institution , that we have violence .
Michael Faraday proved that the amount of current necessary to liberate an equivalent weight of an element was the same for all the elements , which quickly led to formulations of negatively and positively charged molecules and concepts of atomic weight .
A cookie is a very small data file ( which normally includes an anonymous unique identifier ) which is sent to your browser by a web server and subsequently stored on your computer 's hard drive .
When I hear of this defectiion from my mother , for I am no longer a pupil at that Convent , I find it difficult to understand for in those days to me a nun was a nun was a nun .
attribute : an attribute is the value of a named feature of a particular annotation type , which can either ( partially ) cover the instance annotation considered or another instance annotation which is related to the instance annotation considered .
A coin is a coin and so is not unique , and therefore cannot be art .
In the ancient world an abacus was a flat surface for reckoning accounts , not necessarily an object but sometimes just an area marked out in the sand and often with pebbles as tokens .
The beekeeper who has never had a swarm is either liar or he lost all his bees .
Aedes In ancient Rome , an aedes was an edifice or minor shrine which had not been formally consecrated .
Well , an exam is the very best reason to miss it .
" To be treated as a fascist by a communist is a compliment , " says Sarkozy .
A module is a unit of the degree ; it is a topic-based course of 12 weeks duration .
The Eurozone as a whole is the largest economy in the world .
07 / 03 / 12 I know when a child is a witch .
The only thing worse than killing youself and leaving a note is the " accident " .
A guillotine is the fastest way of cutting up hundreds of flashcards .
As you will know , a magnetron is the heart of radar - used for generating very high-frequency radio oscillations .
The final thing i 'll say is , do n't forget that a windmill was a working place .
A lease is a legally binding document that entitles the tenant to trade at a specified address for a stated period of time .
Now where all avenues are blocked we have seen that time and again in history workers have voted with their feet and formed new organisations - an example is the IWW which in the U.S. back in the early 20th Century was distinguished by its refusal to countenance racist practices and became popular among migrant and transient workers of all colours in the U.S. and elsewhere .
For example , if a coach is the line manager of a coachee they will come to a point where the manager will be directive about actions and goals .
Rabbi Tuckman : A moyel is a very important guy .
A river is a living thing , with a mind and a will of its own .
Early in my career , I realized that good soundtrack of a movie was the result of how you handle the raw material that was recorded .
Colour Personal Caricature Put yourself in the picture , a caricature is a great gift 4 someone with a sense of humour .
A Facilitator is a trained individual who is able to provide specialist advice and guidance to groups .
I 'm glad you liked the POTC movies , that 's great , and we want to encourage people sharing their opinions here at Front Row Reviews but a review is a personal reaction to a film and as such they ca n't do it for everyone .
It has been said that homosexuality might be a legitimate bar from those government posts which relate directly to the issue : how can a homosexual be the minister with responsibility for families ?
A legacy is a gift of property , money or possessions left in your will .
The normal behaviour of a process is this .
eden has some points , but men are n't dogs to be trained - a loser is a loser - do n't waste your time trying to train them with reward and punishment .
The BIOS ( Basic Input / Output System ) in a PC is a set of ROM-resident software that provides a low-level interface to devices such as the keyboard , printer , and so on .
A folder is a desktop container object , whose function is to hold other objects .
A directory is a container object on a disk , and its function is to hold files ( and possibly other directories , which are then called subdirectories ) .
A shadow is a pointer to a real file or a pointer to an abstract object .
A class is a data type , and it 's similar to the " record " type in many programming languages , or to a C " struct " type .
A library is a collection of executable code , preferably code that is general-purpose enough to be useful in many different programs .
A capias is a civil arrest warrant used to bring a person physically into court to respond to a specific case or claim .
Faith is the root , profession is the stem ; and as a root without a stem is an incomplete if not an unsightly object , so a stem without a root is a fading , withering plant .
A Bolometer is a device which measures increases in temperature due to the radiant energy it receives at all wavelengths .
Creating a program is an achievement that can always make you proud and confident of your potential .
A store is a business that has to deal with these issues .
Among the advantages of a religion is the ready-made community waiting to welcome you when you move elsewhere .
A cookie is a small text file stored on the users hard drive that may help you access pages faster and allows our server to recognize you as you navigate within the site .
Setting up a filter is a process of constant tuning .
I was -- a mother is the only one who would know the feeling I had .
Not just when a customer was a member of the press , either .
Being a castaway was a nonenriching environment .
One hint of an agenda is the two " veterans ' activists " CBS interviewed for the segments - hardly disinterested parties .
Remember that a certificate is a signed message from the CA containing the identity of the user .
So , how serious a threat is this ?
A gesture is an interaction between users and your application through a touch screen .
Simply having a female character in a movie is a problem already .
Dashboard Viewer - a dashboard is a particular layout of one or more visualization widgets and a set ( or not ) of content filtering conditions to be displayed on a canvas .
A T-wave is an ocean sound wave from an earthquake that travels through the water and is recorded on a hydrophone .
A function is a block which has local variables that are given new values each time the block is evaluated .
An object is a group of variables which have values in a specific context .
For instance , the list of arguments to a function is a dialect that can contain many variations other than those which have been shown here .
At least two Ladies Night 's one is a garage rock band from Vancouver a second is an experimental rock band from Atlanta User-contributed text is available under the Creative Commons By-SA License and may also be available under the GNU FDL .
Also using all Capital letters in a communication is the equivalent of shouting at someone , again bad manners .
like what , a hole were the stereo was , this also happened in the hillsborough area too , as i 'm sure other posters will verify ...
A lawn is a plot of land that has been planted with grass that is maintained at a constant height creating a carpet-like look and feel .
( 7 ) For the purposes of this section , the subject matter of an application is a devolved Scottish matter if it -
A bonus is the way it only boils the water you need : no half kettle of boiling water unused .
See what you have there is a set of coaxail speakers , what you really need for an upgrade is a set of components .
A florist is a person designing flower arrangements and selling them .
A sixfoil is a fragment of a nuclear reactor VVER - 1000 of Khmelnyts ' kyi nuclear power-station which consists of seven six-edged cassettes .
One of those magic nights when being a playwright was a wonderful thing to be .
As Dundas says , ' Following a recipe is a bit like using a GPS - you do n't necessarily know how you got there .
The only option for a meal was the Little Chef .
A relationship is a journey of self-discovery and must begin with self-love and self-acceptance .
A photon is a quantum ( smallest particle ) of electromagnetic energy with zero mass - ie .
Now a spreadsheet is a pretty blunt instrument , in spite of years of refinement from the original humble VisiCalc on the Apple II and the Commodore Pet to the dizzy heights of Excel and Lotus 1 -2 -3 .
An invitation is the gateway to your wedding , it 's important to make ...
A wedding is an ...
C. Curfew Contrasted with Home Detention Traditionally , a curfew is a requirement for a person to remain at home and not to be " abroad " during the hours of the night , when it is easier to commit crime ( particularly outdoor crime ) and escape detection .
A quote is a fixed price for the job and should not change , whereas an estimate can vary by a reasonable amount .
EPC encoding on a tag is a string of bits , consisting of a tiered , variable length header followed by a series of numeric fields whose overall length , structure , and function are completely determined by the header value .
A worm is a self-replicating computer program .
A website is a definite ; again , it does not have to be super fancy , but it wouldnt harm to put a little TLC into it !
I think setting a limit is a step forward and it needs to happen if people like me who are highly trained , highly motivated and willing to start at the bottom taking orders and doing menial jobs to get a foot in the door but cannot afford to support themselves without being paid .
A nanosphere is a hollow spherical cyanoacrylate polymer either filled with the active drug or with the active drug adsorbed on its surface .
A soy is an preface of fuller citronella and research , which facades stereotypical degrees ; nourishing bachelor 's degrees , master 's odors and fillers in a instability of subjects .
Men purposefully ascend that grooming their psychometrics for a demitasse is a turf of notification and dependency .
A resume is a summary about your skills , working experience and education .
Deciding to look after a child on your own or within a couple is a massive commitment for at least 18 years and it is important to seriously consider the implications in all areas of your life .
And if you tell me of the miseries of the battle-field , with the sensitive Channing , ( of whose love of life I am ashamed ) , what of a few days of agony , what of a vulture being the bier , tomb and parson of a hero , compared to the long years of sticking on a bed and wished away ?
Fear the deepest pit-falls of age , when pressing on , in imagination at least , to Him with whom a day is a thou-sand years , - with whom all miseries and irregularities are conforming to universal good !
Another thing he says is the following : " Before you eat or drink anything , consider carefully who you eat or drink with rather than hat you eat or drink : for feeding without a friend is the life of a lion or wolf .
Surely , a class is a class irrespective of what kind of clothing it is .
However to actually strive to make it appear that an individual is the originator of the image and that it is somehow the product of their intellect is perverse .
Should a psychiatrist be able to able to detect that a patient is a fraud ?
Psychiatrists assume that the content of what is being said by a patient is an expression of the inner process of thinking .
A isolation is a liable stool of readers with third processes who are built to a unprecedented purpose , discourse goals , and blow for which they exclude themselves swiftly medicinal ( katzenbach first , difficult microwaves celebrate smallest outrange of problems straightforward to impose excesses and colleges ( wheelan , 2005 ) .
An event is a notification from the system that may invoke an ...
In addition , rights of subrogation cannot be exercised against a body who although not named as an insured is a party for whose benefit ( even if only in part ) the policy had been taken out and who had contributed to the premium ( Mark Rolands v Bernie Inns Limited [ 1985 ] 3 AER 473 ) .
A warranty is a term of the insurance policy which if broken entitles the insurer to terminate the contract from the time of the breach regardless of whether the breach is material .
The position is given a statutory footing in Section 33 ( 3 ) of the Marine Insurance Act 1906 which states that " a warranty is a condition which must be exactly complied with .
A contractor 's all risks " CAR " policy is a material damage policy .
As Dmitri Mortelmans puts it , " The sign-value of an object is a catchall in which several diverse significations can be brought together " .
Which signifiers we choose from an image is a process that is dependent on the observer - his / her experiences , personality , interests etc. Linguistic messages in advertising help provide a direction to the mind on which signifiers to choose and how to interpret them .
What strikes you most acutely on such a morning is the realisation of what an anniversary is : proof of time passed .
Emotional purchases , and for many of us a car is an emotional one , do n't make logical sense .
A rose is a woody perennial of the genus Rosa , within the family Rosaceae .
As PH has said such an implementation is another thing to faff around during an inspection and will either blow away in a light breeze or get damaged .
;-) BSAC will only change for the better if we ( and I mean you as well ) continue to spread the message that a diver is a diver no matter where they trained .
I think getting her a book is a good idea .
I think a hexagram is a whole , every part existing at the same moment .
I have started this petition as I love watching both shows and although I appreciate the double helping of Eastenders watching 1.5 hours of soap a night is a big commitment and can be overkill .
Obstructing an bailiff is a criminal offence to which a debtor can receive a long prison sentence .
Join the inn-crowd : Converting a pub is no easy task , but it can pay off for those with clear heads ...
Sure everyone that thinks noisy 's plotting to have an affair is a really dumb idea could just keep quiet , but why should we ?
One ratio that is widely used to ascertain whether the current share price can be considered reasonable given the financial soundness and performance of a company is the price-to-earnings or ' P / E ' ratio .
Plainly , the fact of such an order is an important factor in the welfare equation , but I respectfully agree with counsel that it is not , in effect , a trump card preventing relocation .
A chatterbox is a box which contains surprise items .
In chess parlance a zugzwang is a position in which one player can move only with loss or severe disadvantage .
To many people a conservatory is a cheap way to increase the living area of their home , living areas need to warm in winter , conservatories are very good at loosing heat .
Do n't think you can train a snake like you train a dog ... a reptile is a completely alien creature to you .
Blue tongued Skinks - a slightly larger choice here , but if you 're after a bit of a bigger lizard then a skink is a good place to start .
Which is why wanting your security to be a process is a bad idea .
A calzone is a folded pizza , usually shaped like a half-moon and stuffed with cheese and possibly vegetables , meat , and / or sauce and it can be baked or fried .
Malware ( it 's not , it 's a fairly well-known text editor , and I redownloaded / rescanned to be sure ) , and it said that my c :\ a folder is a Trojan .
' " " I think social media as a whole is a pain in the side of society , " Erdogan said .
One famous documented case of a miracle is the case of Vittorio Michelli .
A hero is the character that a shitload of stories and / or genres need in order to exist .
I will stipulate that part of the attraction of a book is a visceral smell and feel of paper .
Comms with a Conscience is all about offering communications services and advice with an ethical touch .
A sector is the equivalent of a sub-district or division in Kenya .
Further , there is no published case deciding whether a blogger is a journalist .
All this leads up to the big question of the survey : " Do you think that anyone who works in a library is a librarian ?
The most sensitive part of a woman is the front area anyway and that is what needs to be stimulated .
One of the things that swayed us to stay and purchase a home was the dog friendly nature of Austin .
It cannot be stressed too strongly that a shortage is an excess of quantity demanded over supply available .
No luck on that yet , but what really is a problem is the carpeting lining the walls in my car trunk .
The formation of such a council is an act of war .
A mortgage is a type of danger for the lender .
By Jane Maati Smith Understand Your Depression Symptoms Feeling sad , unhappy , or down every once in a while is a ...
wholesale sunglasses cheap A tote is a must for the summer , if you 're going to the beach or shopping .
A fibroblast is a connective tissue cell which secretes an extracellular matrix rich in collagen and other macromolecules .
Constructing a building is a pretty tough job , but very rewarding when you see it finished .
In spite of this some people seem to have the confusion that when Allah Almighty is All-Powerful , Self-Sufficient , and Independent of the help of all His creatures , how then can a man be a helper of Allah ?
But the purchase of a book is a significant act , when considered culturally as well as economically .
( An autoreposponder is a automated , predefined email response , similar to " fax on demand " , in case you were wondering . ) Users who read their mail offline can still queue up a message addressed to your autoresponder and send it the next time they connect to the Internet .
A depression is a severe downturn in economic activity that lasts for several years .
So , I think you have lost yourself in the mutation phase , thinking that Antisemitism is Antisemitism is Antisemitism - a rose is a rose is rose .
A micromollusk is a shelled mollusk which is extremely small , even at full adult size .
There are various theories about the meaning of this verse , and there have been many attempts to show that a person is the Antichrist by relating his name to the number 666 .
A win is a win , not a canonization or a stamp of approval .
* * a parang is a stout straight knife used in Malaysia and Indonesia .
placebo A placebo is a dummy medicine containing no active ingredients .
The fact an input is a date picker may not matter what-so-ever to any logical aspects of your application , its a view detail .
Specifically , a simplex is the convex hull of a set of ( n + 1 ) affinely independent points in some Euclidean space of dimension n or higher ( i.e. a set of points such that no m-plane contains more than ( m + 1 ) of them ; such points are said to be in general position ) .
61 That is , the observance of the sanctity of the " Symbols " by a man is a proof that there is piety in his heart .
Seriously , in 1900 they thought a woman preferring a laboratory to a kitchen was a sure sign of lesbianism ?
Life is full of good stuff here and now , and losing a luxury is a luxury problem .
Surely a shim is a shim ?
Get other people to take them to the Labour Exchange , get them documented , finding a job was no problem , get somebody to that .
The animal charity is warning that causing unnecessary suffering and abandoning an animal are both criminal offences and the punishment can be severe .
" But for us , having three family members in a show is a way of life .
Being an amateur is the opposite of going pro .
A thimble is a kiss .
A kiss is a small gift .
Around here , an example is the A 1 / M 1 Link Road .
Working for a wage is the natural way of life .
Developing a plan is a very important part of finishing your project on time and under budget .
There are hundreds and thousands dying everyday on both sides and a loss is a loss whether it is India , Pak or any other country .
u believe in Chanakiya - ur great philospher - for who a neighbour is a born enemy .
Running a country based on any religion or a dogma is a thing of the past .
to get the boiler out just take the cowling off outside then there is about 10 screws undo them then the heater is ready to come out , all the water pipes are snap on so you just pull them off and pull the cable off the burner , the only place you need a spanner is the gas pipe .
A passacaglia is a set of variations over a ground bass ( constantly repeating itself ) .
Thirty odd nicker for a ticket was a bit steep , but compared to the price of the togger these days it 's not that bad , so me and the editor plus a couple of the old Neth stoners decided to lump on .
However , it seems that a key reason for it being considered that a company is the best kind of body to perform this role is that it will not be subject to EU procurement rules .
Just best to remember like Bob Dylan says : " A man is a success if he gets up in the morning , goes to bed at night and in between does what he wants to do .
Was driving through Nuneham last night , the people who almost caused an accident were the OM photographer flashing the camera DIRECTLY INTO ONCOMING DRIVER 'S EYES and also the bloody idiot dancing around on the pavement .
A year is a long time but keep at it .
The main difference is that if property ( and a dog is property ) is permanently marked ( in this case a tattoo is a visable mark ) , then it MUST be returned to the owner .
An example is the use of a 5¼ " floppy disk drive as well as the more common 3½ " drive .
If you look in the dictionary , a sigil is a symbol with mystical significance .
In magical terms , a sigil is a tool - it 's a shape you design that tricks your mind into magicking a specific effect into your life .
An appointment is the earliest time the message can be placed in the network .
Neither deserved to lose and a point a piece was a fair result .
A pilot is a good way forward to address this , especially if you involve groups of employees or roles where flexible working looks like a challenge !
Committing suicide by jumping in front of a train IS a selfish act .
A key was the use of the word names .
A dictator was a dictator , and a dead , starving or tortured human was the same on either side of the Eastern border .
A word is a contiguous sequence of ( 1 ) normal characters or ( 2 ) other characters preceded by the escape character \ .
A variable is a word in which the first character is ?
A function is a special kind of relation .
A list is a finite sequence of objects .
An object is a list if and only if there is a corresponding expression involving the listof operator .
null tests whether or not an object is the empty list .
A character is a printed symbol , such as a digit or a letter .
A string is a list of characters .
( c ) determine whether to refer to the court for review under subsection 672.84 ( 1 ) a finding that an accused is a high-risk accused .
( 13.3 ) If the Review Board refers to the court for review under subsection 672.84 ( 1 ) a finding that an accused is a high-risk accused , it shall notify every victim of the offence that they are entitled to file a statement with the court in accordance with subsection ( 14 ) .
( 5 ) For greater certainty , a finding that an accused is a high-risk accused is a disposition and sections 672.72 to 672.78 apply to it .
Melville Dewey , the father of modern American librarianship and efficiency therein , believed that a library was a moral bulwark .
Minsky argued that a key mechanism that pushes an economy towards a crisis is the accumulation of debt by the non-government sector .
A relativist might say that a mother 's desires determine whether an abortion is the right thing for her to do .
Let 's take an example , Gareth : A man is a chronic abuser of alcohol and dies of cirhosis of the liver .
The ultimate step in genetic " farming " will be the production of an android-clone .12 An android-clone is the donor 's identical twin born without the humanizing portions of the brain 's cortex : the product of a sort of " reverse eugenics .
A conduit is a program that resides on your desktop and synchronizes the data in your Pilot with data on the Desktop .
His extensive background in the classics has qualified him for a job is a games person at a local amusement park called Adventure land .
Having to teach your mates how to cook despite them living alone for over a year is a very disconcerting experience .
( he also tookhis advanced driving test in the late 1980 's ) I would like you to explain precisely how , and why a PWD is any more unsafe than the cretin I tell about , in the incident i mention below , please .
It hardly feels like the time to crack open the champagne , even if winning in Sri Lanka in such a series is a first and therefore promising .
BG have already put 2 rises on fuel and a third is an insult .
Being a husband is a responsible position and not for single near middle age men who are concerned for only there own welfare .
Originally posted by Cycleracer Being a husband is a responsible position and not for single near middle age men who are concerned for only there own welfare .
A man is a success if he gets up in the morning and goes to bed at night and in between does what he wants to do .
It 's easier to do stuff today , but I think the signal to noise ratio of the Net as a whole is a darn sight worse !
Its a moral dilemma but to my mind saving a life is a greater good than protecting people who choose not to decide what should happen after their death .
We went to Fuerteventura a couple of years ago after I spent a pleasant Sunday afternoon getting the starting price down from around £ 1100 to £ 850 for a week 's all inc for two adults and a free child by playing Going Places , Thomas Cook and Lunn Poly against each other .
If everyone who ever pinched a backside is a threat to children then the human race is doomed .
Being a paedophile is a crime , so the comparison between offering asylum to people who may be persecuted because they are homosexual in no way implies that we would or will offer asylum to paedophiles .
I think that calling this place a resort is a bit of a stretch , it may have been resort like when it began , now it is just a sprawling hotel , that is dark and kind of creepy .
A flûte is a stem glass with a tall and narrow bowl .
A week is a long time on politics ..
" Maybe an assist-chair is the right idea , though .
You are quite correct here in Texas a buzzard is a carrion eating vulture .
Being able to write a text message on a keyboard is a great blessing !
Much better option if you have a laptop is a dongle .
The closest we come to a field is the graveyard but that still has structures to hide behind and be tied to .
I do n't see how potential danger within a relationship is a sign that True Blood is more faithful to the original vampire idea than Twilight .
its so dull apart from the welsh girl who kicked off.i believe producers did tell her to sing a pink song and tulisa trying to make her out to be a liar is a cow oh and mel b telling people they cant sing when she has had a 15 year career based on rubbish what larks !!
X factor has been on its last legs for years , and having nicole as a judge is a huge mistake she was terrible on the usa version , there were only 2 singers that stood out the lass who wrote her own song and Jahmene he was world class hope the lad gets through to the live shows , mel b was shocking dont know why she was a guest judge she aint a good singer and hasnt done much in her career .
An excess is the amount you contribute if you claim for damage to or loss to your home .
Consider the value of A if B is the best variation : it must be an upper bound on the true value of A. In the direct line of the search , with only alpha-beta pruning in effect , whether a result is an exact value , an upper bound , or a lower bound does not matter .
Part of the thrill of being told a story is the chance of being hoodwinked or taken .
My sense of " using " a book is the excitement of finding myself at the receiving end of our most intimate and acute means of communication .
Sometimes the easiest-seeming stories to a reader are the hardest kind to write .
So how can a stripper be a feminist if she is putting herself onstage for men 's pleasure with no thought of making a feminist statement ?
A family is a group , as is a neighbourhood , friends , work colleagues .
You know a fan 's a fan .
Unfortunately , this means that a one-day story about a meathead being a jerk to another meathead turned into something with more legs than JFK 's White House .
I know I would not sign a contract to buy a car under a situation were the car dealer gets to decide my payment after I take the car home .
Choosing a partner is an important part of being successful in a Jack and Jill poker tournament .
A trait is an adjective .
A role is a job or a " purpose " a character has .
In particular : 1 ) I assume that you would view the celibacy of a priest is a good example of this kind of chastity , but if so , how is it an " integration " of the priest 's sexuality into his whole as a person , rather than in large part a rejection of his sexuality ?
In that case , a flame is an admission of fatal weakness and should be read as such .
The Internet has nothing to do with UETA or whether a note is a paper note or an electronic note ( actually the correct term for an electronic note under UETA is " electronic transferrable record " ) .
A separation is a term within a troubled marriage .
A unibody is a replacement for the frame of the car .
A title is a certificate that shows ownership of a vehicle .
Loosing a child is the worse thing that could ever happen to a parent , there are NO words in any language that will ever heal the hurt , I know this for a fact .
Or , are you interested in how high or how low a river is this year compared to a " normal " year ?
Because a clone is an exact genetic duplicate of the donor , its stem cells could be used to develop healthy new tissues that could be put back into the donor 's body without fear of rejection .
Due to the shortcomings A shortcoming is a character flaw .
Unemployment on the scale for which the unemployment insurance system is meant to be a stabilizer is a macroeconomic phenomenon , and therefore not a state responsibility or a risk that an individual state can insure against .
A cookie is a small text file that is written to your computer 's hard drive .
A clock is a lot of company .
Again , we are reminded that " a prophet is a prophet only when acting as such .
He also ignores Joseph 's explicit statement that " A prophet is a prophet only when acting as such .
" ... visited with a brother and sister from Michigan who thought that a prophet is always a prophet ; ' but I told them that a prophet was a prophet only when he was acting as such .
Again , we must remember that he said " A prophet is a prophet only when acting as such .
For instance , a cardiologist is a doctor who specializes in taking care of the heart .
A trigger is a binding that specifies which postback control and event cause a panel to update .
IP advocates argued from natural rights that an idea is the product of intellectual labor and , thus , a form of wealth .
From Nov 2011 to Dec 2012 , the EID program mapped regional referral hospitals , district hospitals , and other health facilities that could function as sample transport ' HUBS ' , a hub being the coordination center of the sub district network .
UH -60 / S -70 A Black Hawk Multi-Mission Helicopter The S -70 A helicopter is the export version of the multi-mission Black ...
Breaking a bone is a big shock to your whole body .
" Displaying a atheist monument on the grounds of a government courthouse where an established mainstream religion has a monument is a pretty good example of " ...
This phone , without a doubt is a HUGE disapointment .
Tommy said this guy proved that a cheater is a cheater .
A review is an act of persuasion , an argument .
Eating an icepop is a great way to get fluids .
And getting a traffic is a linkbuilder 's task Nr 1 , it only depends if you get it through SERP or directly .
Christine I think that a blog is an excellent idea in a situation such as yours , where you are making the product you are selling .
Blogs are great for any business , small or large , and even if your small or large business does not have a website , a blog is a great place to start !
For a very long time , linguists have known that there is no qualitative difference between a dialect and a language : a very old joke has it that a language is a dialect with an army and navy .
At the strongest possible magnification , we find that dialects are composed of idiolects , an idiolect being the dialect of a single person .
Finding a solution is a challenging project because of the number of communities involved , each with their own wastewater management issues .
So if a man be a thief , he robs Me of honor , and takes it himself .
The mathematical gradient of a function is a directional derivative which points in the direction of the maximum rate of change of the function .
" A copyright is a right of intellectual property , whereby authors obtain , for a limited time , certain exclusive rights to their works " from the Copyright FAQ .
A simple is an entity that has no proper parts .
Such a subject is the standard figure , robot of a reconstituted subject trying to re-coup its residual vestiges , or whatever is left of them .
A Résumé is a one - or two-pager , which gives the prospective employer just general information at a glance .
" Those boys a mine been some good at it too .
In his latest post , The " Information Architecture " Community Has a Problem is a prime example of his ability to distil the noise down to the core problem .
One of the few Canadian movies I can think of that demonstrated a Hollywood-style sentimentality toward an animal was the movie Bon Cop , Bad Cop , where one of the heroes tells a tale of being confronted by an angry dog and of subduing it without killing it .
Begin by defining a time-line and its purpose ( A time-line is a diagram that shows when and in what order important dates happened ) .
Let 's face it : a recession is no respecter of class , religion or occupation .
Mirror , mirror ... imagine that looking into a mirror was a look inside of someone 's life .. imagine that someone on the other side of that wall was looking into your life ... behold , Jezebel 's Mirror .
According to the ancient Romans , a munus was a public function , task or act that is performed by a citizen on behalf of the community for the community .
A mast is a freestanding structure which supports antennas at a height where they can transmit and receive radio waves .
DESTROYER MAN To ride a destroyer was the ambition of every navy officer before the development of aviation , and it still is .
In his essay , Howard Zinn writes that " the closest to such an attempt was a military estimate that an invasion of the southernmost island of Japan would cause 30,000 American dead and wounded " .
An example is the prominence of public service broadcasters .
The literal equivalent , i.e. a capital company , is a tautology cf. Żebrowski 2003 : 59 ) ; the same applies to incorporated company since in English law a company is an incorporated body .
This type of partnership is based on the so-called French-German model , where an entity is a derivative of a limited partnership ( Lewandowski 2005 : 23 ) .
So , the term includes people who sell what they buy from others as well as those who sell what they make themselves , such as manufacturers A comerciante is a trader , a merchant , as I said in a previous article for the Translation Journal .
A decreto-lei is a decree-law .
A desembargador is a judge in an intermediate court .
A check is a saque [ draft ] against a bank account .
Lately , however , potential petitioners for bankruptcy have begun to notice that a customer is a valuable asset and that customers who have credit are customers who buy .
May 's wife was dying of cancer , he had no money , and a fairy-tale was the only Christmas gift he could give his four-year-old daughter , Barbara .
Besides , I 'm beyond giving a rat 's a * * .
Following the paths of a maze was a means of ritual invocation akin to dance .
In the UK , parents and children are still being punished for old aspirations , for the way a whole generation took advantage of grammar schools and won university places in the days when a degree was some kind of worthwhile qualification .
It only looked about 3 lb but a fish is a fish .
Either way a promise is a promise .
Growing into an adult is a long , time-consuming business , and Cog -- and the team that is building Cog -- will need all the help it can get .
Building a squad is a numbers game , some like Mr Ward will blossom , others will be moved on , and so the roundabout should never stop .
Therefore , he comments ( I Cor 7:22 7:22 ) that ' ... he who was called in the Lord as a slave is a freedman of the Lord .
Getting Around For those who fly to their cruise , renting a car is an excellent choice , both for day-trippers and for those who are staying multiple days , because attractions are spread out .
A highlight is the Tiffany Chapel , in Byzantine style , which includes stained-glass windows , a baptismal font , altar , tabernacle , and a glass mosaic behind the altar .
' Choosing to live in Sheffield for a year was the best decision I ever made .
But oh , what a time was this !
What a turn was this !
To offer anything that had a defect was an abomination to God ( Deut 17:1 17:1 ) .
Those loveable rouges who like to play hard at the Crawley and Horsham Hunt have been busy just lately , at the Cowdry House meet Lord Cowdry served an injunction on a Sab which basically said if you dont tell us the names of the passengers in your van we 'll nick yer , as an injunction is a civil matter this Sab considered this a violation of his right to silence and refused to comply .
Once the cabinet system was brought in , I found being a councillor was a joke .
When someone asks what I do , I say I run a photography business - it just happens that being a photographer is a particularly fun bit of that business .
A church is an open rectangle , rounded end , with a cross .
Given things you 've said earlier , I rather suspect you 'd think an STD was the wages of sin , and they deserved it .
A buckling is a whole fish , cooked by hot-smoking ; rollmops are filleted and pickled in vinegar ; the fearsome surströmming of Sweden are lightly salted and allowed to ferment , developing a potent smell in the summer heat .
I mean whoever thought of a light bulb in a frying pan and said it was the birth of an idea was a genius , right ?
If we dare to suggest that a show is a pile of tosh we face getting the cold shoulder at future shows or in this digital age online comments doubting our knowledge and experience !
The " intuition , " if one likes , that the life of a child is more valuable that the life of a grasshopper or a rabbit is another .
The belief that the life of gorilla is more valuable that the life of a mouse is a third .
A valuation of a player is a real-valued function on the set of her similarity classes .
From a traditional mechanical engineering point of view , a material is some homogeneous blob of material .
presence of a defendant is a condition of due process to the extent that a fair and just hearing would be thwarted by his absence , and to that extent only .
A survey is an effective tool for collection information for decision-making activities .
( Note that a UFO is a nonspecific term and could be either an ARV or an ETV . ) * Programmed Life Forms ( PLFs ) - these are well-crafted alien-appearing creatures that , while completely manmade , often deceive unknowing people as ' aliens ' .
If a word is a slur in ANY language in any world filter , that word cannot be used in Pokemon .
An arrest is a serious business .
On the other hand , in iaido , a sword is a great equalizer , and it does n't take much strength to wield it effectively .
" Every moment with a child is a chance to plant a seed .
If conversions were to be banned , then every reformer of a religion is an outlaw .
A task is a series of actions or behaviors that accomplishes a goal .
It turns out that even the style of a weblog is a hinderance to me writing .
A Property is a Resource that has a name and can be used as a property , for example or .
Independence Since a Property is a resource , any independent organization ( or even person ) can invent them .
Getting multi-laterals to combine resources to leverage an activity is a daunting task .
If your projects contain more screen shots of an application than captions , a storyboard is a good idea .
The marginal cost of a change is the additional cost caused by the change .
On the other hand , a teacher is an essential part of the three-fold path to enlightenment .
A teaser is a perfect way of presenting your information without giving away all of it .
For Jacobs a home was a means to an end , a component in a vast mosaic of interlocking urban variety .
" Praising Linda as " an exemplary wife and mother , " Arthur fondly recalls a comical moment on an airplane with her then 4 - year old daughter Kia who insisted that " a mother is the person who takes care of you when the babysitter cannot .
The death of a son was a misfortune for the farm , like the loss of a horse or a cow .
All I am saying is that there are a lot of clients who do n't realize that a $ 150 session with a CD is a lot cheaper than a $ 75 session with no CD .
From doing this exercise , I learned a lot of things about my taste for photography : ( 1 ) Landscape photography is what really gets my heart beating , ( 2 ) Despite the craze around HDR , you do n't have to expose every dark shadow to make a beautiful picture , and ( 3 ) What really makes or breaks a picture is the light .
" The technique of building a boat was a little different after Lewis and Clark showed up .
A rulebook is a sequence of rules to be followed in order until one of them stops the process by making a decision ( as a success or a failure , possibly accompanied by a value of some kind ) .
And instantly realized how big a mistake was that .
A primitive value is a member of one of the following built-in types : Undefined , Null , Boolean , Number , and String ; an object is a member of the remaining built-in type Object ; and a method is a function associated with an object via a property .
A type is a set of data values .
An object is a member of the type Object .
A constructor is a Function object that creates and initialises objects .
A prototype is an object used to implement structure , state , and behaviour inheritance in ECMAScript .
I actually think a photo is a good idea - I think it helps to " humanise " your application for a post in that once somebody sees the person behind the application there is somehow more to the CV than just words .
Yes if you setup a ltd company you need a business bank account or else how are cheques , etc going to be paid in ... a business is a separate entity .
as if say the lilo with a towel is a great product others will copy it and so can work 2 ways ..
The board at a busness are the ones who - 1 .
A ricochet is a clear hit , not a BB rolling on the floor .
Maybe a travellodge is the best way ... they 're cheapish but generally clean and comfy , and they take dogs .
The only people who 'd complain about a service are the people who have used it .
Considering a greyhound is a very wise thing to do We have two greyhounds at present but have had up to four greyhounds at one time and always with other shapes and sizes of dogs .
I am sure you did the right thing BUT all I ever wanted as a child was a dog and if I had got that close and then my Mum and Dad changed their minds I would have been gutted .
Considering the fact that containers can be sold on again at any time ... would a bank be any more inclined to lend ?
A dog in a pram is a pretty unusual situation , but dogs need to be exposed to all sorts of strange things , and more normal things , including cyclists .
I 'm the only director of this company and my wife is 50 % shareholder and what I thought was a mate is the other 50 % shareholder .
This guy who was a mate was a director but had to come off as one because of bad debt he got into .
Many of the problems that people have these days is that they forget that a dog is an animal not a person .
Kind Regards Do you think a million a year is a big turnover then ?
Do you think a million a year is a big turnover then ?
I 'm even liking the costumes as long as they refrain for putting me in pink - but a thong is another matter .
A factotum is a general servant or a person having many diverse activities or responsibilities .
A quintile is a fifth , of course , and the study categorizes various economic status measures into five groups : the top and bottom fifths and those in between , with the first quintile being the lowest or having the least .
Because most people have only one refrigerator , the choice of a refrigerator is a discrete choice .
Being a teenager is a difficult time for anyone , and teenagers in foster care come with their own particular challenges .
Therefore , a tripod is an absolute must for serious self-portrait photographers .
A geonet is a plastic net-like drainage blanket .
Geonet : A geonet is a plastic net-like drainage blanket which may be used in landfill liners in place of sand or gravel for the leachate collection layer .
" Today , the most important audience for a brand is the internal one , " insisted John Grace , president of BrandTaxi , a New York-based brand-consulting firm .
Grab the charts whilst in our production office - TIME ON EARTH re enters the top 100 at # 47 , I 'm sure it will be for a short period but a chart is a chart is a chart .
An InfoTip is the name Microsoft give to a tooltip which has multiple lines .
A name is a name-start characer -- a letter -- followed by any number of name characters -- letters , digits , periods , or hyphens .
( The string " & # " followed by a name is a construct prohibited by this report . ) A number is a sequence of digits .
A chain is a checklist of rules .
An interface is the physical device the packet came in on , or is going out on .
The requirement to surrender a passport is a serious restriction on freedom of movement which is protected under EU law .
Nonperforming Loans in the Post-Bubble Era At the root of the loss of faith in Japan 's financial institutions and the finance system as a whole is the bursting of the bubble economy .
Most of us think that a flower is a flower , garbage is garbage .
The illusion is that a bank is an institution that accepts deposits to build up reserves and then on-lends them at a margin to make money .
If a system is a description of a section of reality or of a process we would like to control , observe , or manipulate , then the system is something that has been produced , not discovered .
Bunge 's pragmatic statement runs as follows : Let A B be a deductive - nomological explanation , like [ x ( P(x) Q(x) ) a P(a) ] ( Q(a) ) .
In technical literature an innovation is the result of transforming a technical invention into a good with economic value .
A sound was a room , a spongy layer of flesh , a trampoline of tissue , rubberish tissue , a laugh , a kiss . .
Fitting a headliner is a horrible , time-consuming experience , and the cost reflects that .
Because a circle is a circle , its radii are equal ; because substance is substance , it has modes , but it is free because its own nature and no extraneous cause compels it to modify itself .
A volition is an idea that affirms or negates itself .
As a word is an exact image of an idea , so is " The Word " an exact image of the invisible God .
A pegmatite can generally be recognized by the large crystals present , and in fact the working definition of a pegmatite is a rock in which most of the material is made up of crystals at least a centimeter in diameter .
Also deserving a mention is the Grisly Diner , because it is a testimony to how desperate some human beings have become in this new world .
When a person is a district delegate and holds a position on the board of directors , they consciously decide ( at least this is what we would expect ) to proceed knowing full well that they will not be able to please everyone , and will be exposed to personal abuse .
Such a requirement is an intrusion upon a third party to the wrongdoing and the need for involvement provides justification for this intrusion .
We also know that a wedding was a time for throwing expense to the wind ; lords were entitled to collect a " relief " or fee from their vassals or tenants on the marriage of their eldest daughter ( though kings sometimes used this money for other things , like beating up on France ) .
Gabrielle for a change is the one that needs constant reassurance from Xena that she is doing the right thing .
Matthew 's usual emblem as an evangelist is a man , because his genealogy emphasized the family ties of Christ .
A community is a group of people who share a geographic location under a local government .
Models come in two flavors , hypotheses and theories , the difference being that a hypothesis is an as-of-yet unsubstantiated and incomplete theory .
A pterygium is an abnormal growth on the cornea , which presents itself as a triangular pink growth .
Being awarded a patent is no guarenty that it is worth more than zero .
" A man is a grown child only , unless he grows through self-discovery .
" An achiever is a dreamer first : without a dream nothing can be achieved .
" Behind the success of every successful man is the hidden hand of a woman , but behind the failure of a man is the hand of two woman .
Like human three year olds , sometimes frenzied activity and / or a tantrum is a signal that the little one has had enough , and needs some quiet time to nap or just settle down .
An internship is a great way to learn more about government , public policy , and current events .
( On first exposure to MMT thinking at this site , I recall major reservations about a CAD being an advantage , as well as thinking the ' taxes drive money ' argument was overstated ) .
" An umpire is a loner .
" 5 Two years later , the astronomer making the " discovery " retracted her claim .6 What she thought was a planet was a star dimmed by interstellar dust .
A cookie is a small text file that is stored on your computer and saves information about your activity on the website .
A caucus is a little different than a primary .
A small loan taken with a cosigner is an excellent way to build good credit quickly .
By far the most interesting evidence thus far submitted that the formation may be an artifact is a result of readings from ground penetrating radar ( see AR Oct 1987 , # 11 ) .
I got friendly with another Aussie girl and her mother , and we worked our way through the cocktail menu over the course of the cruise ;-) A highlight was a meal with a local family in their home - did your trip include that ?
A deed is a legal document used to transfer ownership of land and property .
An annexation is an annexation .
thread A thread is a processor activity in a process .
He helps me out a lot being a lefty that 's pitching in this league for a long time .
Choosing a holiday is a personal decision with a multitude of options and variations .
" Cavuto , however , was n't buying M -1 's answer and asked , " A ho is a ho , right ?
A guy with otherwise no markings pulling his gun and claiming he is a cop is a problem , especially since recently others have reportedly been impersonating cops in Harford County .
A dray is a large heavy cart without stationary sides , built to convey heavy loads , like great loads of fish .
A record profit for an airline is a poor profit in just about any other industry .
A brand is a powerful story .
Which in a country were the wake at an open coffin is still time-honoured tradition seems at least strange - until you realise that different norms seem to exist for religious and academic settings ( see below ) .
Last second heroics should n't have been necessary against the lowly Kings , but hey , a win is a win .
A grenade is a much better idea though .
A seed is any form of content that gets posted on the web that could potentially grow into a sale , or " bear fruit " .
" Knowing they would meet an author was a motivating factor for them to read the novels .
Part of the problem is that the American answer to a problem is the capitalistic solution .
Guest passes ( a guest is an individual that is present with current student / faculty or staff member ) are available for a fee .
A smile is an assault on their worldview , as in , " how dare they be happy , do n't they know life sucks ?
Three times a week jogging for half an hour is a good antidepressant and a therapeutic chance that is possibly not tried often enough .
The entire interface to a driver is a C structure full of data and method pointers , deliberately modeled on a Unix device driver structure .
In Confucianism jen ( wren ) means that the humaneness of a person is the source of these principles .
And , technically , an orangutan is an ape , not a monkey .
A bill is a proposed statutory enactment .
I think one reason there is a monologue rather than a dialogue is the default mode of interaction among Syrians : we have really lived for half a century in solitude .
A thoughtful touch deserving a mention is the extra cleaning sweep from the wipers several seconds after a wash-wipe , to remove any leftover moisture so the screen dries perfectly clear .
The universities , on the other hand , not least because they needed the students , tried to insist that an MA was an essential prerequisite for studying in the theology faculty .
An example is the deep fried tiger prawns , the quality of the prawns were among the best I have ever had but it was wrapped in a rip off tempura batter served with a bad " Thai chilli dip " .
A former student once described him as " embracing the idea that education as a process was an effort to realize human potential , indeed , even more , it was an effort designed to make potential possible .
Holding it away from your body or placing it on a table is the safest bet .
A citation is the brief bibliographic information in the body of the paper that refers the reader to a complete reference in the bibliography .
Not every aa meeting is pleasant , its not a vicars tea party its a desperate attempt by desperate people to live soberly and regain some dignity and self worth and the only people who truly understand an alcoholic is another alcoholic .
A second was an occasional walk by the sea and the third rather more frequent visits to a well-known football stadium in the east end of Glasgow .
MY BIG BEEF , is that excellent staff , experienced staff , who have achieved their role or status from pure hard work achieving Diplomas or Management qualifications , cannot be put forward for the EYP course , as a degree is a pre requisite .
I must admit the one thing that I was pleased to see that I hope remains true in undertaking the EYPS is that a degree is a mandatory requirement and so is having a basic level in Maths and English GCSE .
I think I have gained an NVQ each time I have supported a student being that more emphasis appears to placed on me meeting a standard and a deadline than the student in question .
Using simple drama techniques with a group is another way to encourage learners to look more closely at objects and artwork - and have some fun at the same time .
Two nice touches deserving of a mention are the buttons inset in the sides of the front headrests that make adjustment completely hassle-free , and the extra shoulder bolstering on the front seats that provides excellent support exactly where you want it .
However , it is not right to ignore the words " aids , abets " in considering whether a person is an accessory before the fact .
The news report on the radio , informing them of the escaped lunatic with a hook for a hand is a further interdiction to get out of there .
A fluff is a little more difficult to recover from , comprising , as it typically does , a lot of wrong notes over a two or four bar break .
NCTQ 's methodology of reviewing course syllabi on websites to determine the effectiveness of a program is an antiquated approach that CEC stopped using over a decade ago .
Climbing a mountain is an example of a function that does not increase continuously : a person 's altitude y does not always increase as the distance from the summit decreases owing to the intervening hills and valleys .
Increasingly popular among nonprofit boards , a dashboard is a reporting tool for communicating with an organization 's key stakeholders and leadership about mission-related goals , capacity-related goals , resource needs , and desired outcomes / outcome measurement .
The only thing gold I got from a client was a huge bottle of Cuervo Gold 1800 .
I am sure my son 22 mo will love them dipped in some mashed avocado or guac , , but - 20 in a recipe is a little much for us .
In fact , while I had always heard of the phrase " like a flock of starving Armenians " used by my grandparents and my parents , I had no idea that a genocide was the origins of it .
Again I come to the conclusion that using QED ( and the Lagrangian associated with Maxwell 's equation ) as an example is the right thing to do , but I will need to re-read other accounts that introduce interacti 0 ns immediately after having explained scalar b 0 s 0 ns .
The most critical part of the isolation procedure for keeping herpesvirus problems to a minimum is the period after the kittens are weaned and before their vaccination series is finished ( twelve weeks of age ) .
It 's rare if any single characteristic of a quarterback is a magic pill or knock-out factor .
He 's gone off with a device that can transform a human into a Rhunk-the planet 's dominant species , an unstoppable juggernaut-and back , which is a smart move as becoming a Rhunk is the only way to survive meeting one .
A crook is a crook , retard .
A nap was the farthest thing from her mind today .
How many UST facilities can an individual be the Designated UST Operator for ?
Ureteroscopy ( Ureteroscope ) br > A ureteroscope is a small instrument with a long wire , a camera , and cage that collects the kidney stone .
phentermine not losing weight can phentermine make your hair fall out But a doctor is the right person to decide how much dosage a patient should be how to make phentermine at home phentermine vs. adipex Phentermine Hydrochloride Tablets and Capsules , USP 37.5 mg ... contact KVK - Phentermine is an appetite suppressant used together with diet and exercise to dallas weight loss clinic phentermine 10 Dec 2012 ...
Physical dependence on a substance is the least problematic part of addiction .
For American middle-class families , college costs are the second highest cost to the family , with the purchase of a home being the most expensive .
This is a very uncool thing to do in general , but particularly when you consider the facts that a laptop is a key component to a DJ 's arsenal , Sinden was in mid-set entertaining a packed club , and LAPTOPS DON ' T GROW ON TREES AND ARE EXPENSIVE TO REPLACE .
The genotype of a person is the genetic legacy that the person carries .
To me , a procedure is a needle biopsy or an endoscopy ; you know , in and out -- overnight at best .
A thrombus is a clot , and coronary thrombosis refers to the formation of a large clot in one of the arteries that feed the heart .
name ] identifier : nondigit identifier nondigit identifier digit nondigit : one of universal-character-name _ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z digit : one of 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 An identifier is an arbitrarily long sequence of letters and digits .
Walking a labyrinth is a metaphor for life-the path shifts in unexpected ways , sometimes diverting you from your goal , but ultimately leading you to the center .
The scope of a label is the function in which it appears .
[ Note : a declaration is a statement ( _ s tmt.dcl _ ) .
If the substatement in a selection-statement is a single statement and not a compound-statement , it is as if it was rewritten to be a com - pound-statement containing the original substatement .
The value of a condition that is an expression is the value of the expression , implicitly converted to bool for statements other than switch ; if that conversion is ill-formed , the program is ill-formed .
scope _ ) which is entered and exited each time through the loop 3 If the substatement in an iteration-statement is a single statement and not a compound-statement , it is as if it was rewritten to be a compound-statement containing the original statement .
Maybe a hero is a single dad who works two or three jobs to support his kids , and cleans house at night after he 's tucked them in their beds .
Or maybe a hero is a young mother , a cancer survivor , who has just learned from her oncologist that she 'll have to undergo yet another round of chemotherapy and radiation .
Maybe a hero is any person who stands up for what is right , in spite of the criticism and mockery of the crowd .
wxGTK : Fix for controls on a toolbar being the full height of the toolbar instead of their natural height .
The time surrounding the birth of a child is a time of celebration and Emmanuel Uniting Church shares that joy and happiness !
Being a householder is the stage where the principal dharma of the person is performed , whether as priest , warrior , etc. , or for women mainly as wife and mother .
A wave is a pulse of energy .
Losing a child is a devastating experience , which Ms .
" Other types of transportation are important , too , but a highway is an integral component of our future economy .
A Hovenweep is a valley with Pueblo village ruins in it .
If the number of smuggling yarns circulating about a town is any reflection of the importance of the place in free trade , then Lymington would have been the trading centre for the whole of Hampshire !
one pound of cotton fibre and it was painfully obvious that a machine was the only answer .
One of the decisive forces which brought the idyll of small states to an end was the revolutionisation of the economy through technical advance - especially the steam engine .
She wished she could tell her mother it did n't really matter , that a horse was a luxury she could live quite well without .
In the land of true fables , a Beast is a Beast is a Beast .
To make a picture is a big happiness .
A break-point is a place within your code where execution will stop .
" The thought that a network operator could track a user 's every move on the Internet , record the details of every search and read every email or attached document is alarming , " Boucher said in his opening remarks at the hearing .
But the educational and social work of a community is the chief source of its life and existence , and is of far greater importance than any other effort undertaken by it .
viii , 9 ) : for a thing is a being , and is true , and therefore knowable , according as it is actual .
: SMT FP Q [ 87 ] A [ 1 ] R.O. 2 Para 1 / 1 Reply OBJ 2 : The essence of an angel is an act in the genus of intelligible things , and therefore it is both intellect and the thing understood .
: SMT FP Q [ 87 ] A [ 2 ] Body Para 1 / 1 I answer that , A habit is a kind of medium between mere power and mere act .
A lesbian is a woman who loves women - Sappho loved women .
A lesbian is a woman who has sexual experiences or wants to have sexual experiences with other women - this is the point where we do n't have evidence .
A mahavatar is a human manifestation of God not born of woman .
It said that a paranoiac is a person who has some idea what is really going on .
It 's safe to assume a website is an ICS ( Schneider , Gentry ) .
Ideally , 30 minutes a day , 5 times a week , but realistically , once a week is the minimum .
The weight of an item is a major consideration in whether it makes the final cut , for there is an indisputable correlation between pack weight and the quality of one 's experience .
An elector is a registered voter in the State of Oregon and resides within the city limits .
Would it be : " Do you know that a website is a ' blog ' when you see it ?
A lignotuber is a woody swelling that occurs at or just below ground level on many fire tolerant plants .
My vision of a chickenhawk is a slightly out of control bird , wobbly in flight , the feathers ruffled with a few falling off , slowly spinning out of control .
A repeat is a string of nucleotides ( the bases , or building blocks , of DNA ) that occurs sequentially multiple times in a given stretch of DNA .
In American terminology a transcript is a record card that follows a student throughout his / her education at each institution .
This sad , dopey , pathetic little crapburger of a creature is some freedom-hating artists ' rendition of what some jackass rogue paleontologists have recently decided to pass off as a juvenile Tyrannosaurus Rex .
( 2 ) " Certification " means the written verification by the department to a lender that a project is a qualified project for which the lending institution may claim a tax credit under the provisions of the Act .
Any SEO expert will tell you a blog is a wonderful way to boost the SEO of your website .
The existence of a duty is a question of law and only if such a duty is found to exist does the trier of fact then determine whether the defendant violated that duty in the particular situation at hand .
" ( He thinks that anything remotely resembling an apple is an apple ... and apparently anything remotely tasting like an apple , too , since it was up until a week ago that bananas were also apples .
A program using OCR needs enough data to intelligently decide if something on a page is a letter " l " , the number " 1 " , or a vertical graphic .
A friend delighted me with this Saul Bellow quote : " A writer is a reader moved to emulation .
A router is any device with more than one interface on which you are running the IP protocol ( do n't get academic on this ) .
The thing on the bottom left that looks like sewer water in a glass is the Homemade Barley with Mint .
A shortcut is an Intent that directly specifies the ComponentName it should run .
Another material that may be regarded as a ceramic is the element carbon ( in the form of diamond or graphite ) .
( A semiconductor is a material with greater electrical conductivity than an insulator has but with less than that of a good conductor . ) Other types of ceramics , such as aluminum oxide , do not conduct electricity at all .
Our soldiers would probably be a just as willing to fight for spoiled ' girly-men ' liberals as for hedonistic oil-complex satraps The ubiquitous presence in politics of " Ivy league snobs " distinguishes little between " red " and " blue " however My impression of the military as an institution is the same as yours ; however my impression of soldiers themselves is more often very different .
Amongst the aspects to be regarded as when a design is the fashion of individual lower , which may be of ...
The tower is a relic , a monument to the pre-satellite era , when a mountian-top was the highest place anyone could sit for very long .
Remember , the hybrid or mountain bike you rode as a kid is a lot different than the road bike you 're on now .
The business about a duopoly is a red herring .
" The things that get me to want to write a song are the things that I find funny , and the things I find funny are the things that offend people or are swept away or go unnoticed or unsaid , " he says .
) In determining the scope of the defendant 's duty , the court decides whether an activity is an active sport , the inherent risks of that sport , and whether the defendant has increased the risks beyond the risks inherent in the sport .
Using Windows ( Vista Home Premium , to be specific ) for a week was a miserable experience .
If a material were a perfect conductor , a charge would pass through it without resistance , and a perfect insulator would allow no charge to be forced through it .
A lighter is the waved under the business card , and the ink scribble visually MORPHS into an image of the selected card !
The pier at the end of which is a lighthouse is the sailing point for the Waverley being the last paddle steamer in the world , which provides pleasure trips in the summer .
An intercooler works better the colder it is , hence it 's best to not cover it up ( A radiator is an intercooler , of course .
( A radiator is an intercooler , of course .
You just accept a car is a car , and it has what it has and you adjust your driving style etc to match that of the car you get .
Most swarms have a queen of some sort , the definition of a cast is a swarm with a virgin queen , how do you know they were queenless ?
Did you know it 's a law in Florida that if your first post on a forum is a ' recommendation ' , you 're then required to post 6 times more with a ) your favourite theme park ride , b ) your favourite Disney restaurant , c ) your favourite non-Disney restaurant , d ) your favourite Orlando memory , e ) your thoughts on the light rail system in Florida , and f ) how you chose your user name .
revs seem a little too low in 4th and I do n't want to strain the engine :) Cheers , Chris Driving a diesel is all about low down torque , so 4th should be ok unless chugging ??
Nowadays , it is becoming harder and harder to tell if a figure is a recard or not .
In past times , a safari was a hunting trip in which men and women pursued big game , animals that were not available to hunt in their native locations .
Too large an ego is the # 1 problem with most politicians .
Under current law , the penalty for killing a wolf without a permit is a gross misdemeanor for the first offense and a Class C felony for the second offense , which could result in a $ 5,000 fine or a year in jail .
3 B. This is because God 's plan for a man is a single woman .
3 B. Let us not forget that a proverb is a proverb .
By that I mean , the very nature of a proverb is that a proverb is a statement of generalities , of tendencies , of likelihoods .
1 B. Implicit in the concept of training a child is this matter of control .
If an author is a location where language , ideology , and an individual lived life meet , then it is always important to understand the linguistic , social , historical , familial , personal , and ideological contexts that enclosed the human subject who found writing such an essential act of self-definition .
I always say a sin is a sin no matter how you look at it , but these kids do not choose to let this happen .
In contract law , " [a]n assignment of a right is a manifestation of the assignor 's intention to transfer it by virtue of which the assignor 's right to performance by the obligor is extinguished in whole or in part and the assignee acquires a right to such performance .
Other facilities to receive an upgrade are the outdoor swimming pool , the kids club , shopping zone , parking and landscaping .
The misconception that using a contraceptive is the same as having an abortion may be distressingly common at church , in politics and online , but there is hope .
To answer the first question , a decree is a prescribed limit or boundary , or an ordinance , of God or man .
One of the first Episcopal conferences to take such a stance was the French Bishops Council which asserted in 1989 that , " The whole population and especially the young should be informed of the risks .
A magazine is a despotism or it is nothing .
On a shelf was a row of books , one or two of which would be offered to the visitor for review .
3 C. Third , that the Holy Spirit is also a person is a bit less obvious , but it can be proven .
Right now taking a vacation is a luxury , and having an illness is a termination worthy offense .
Going to a bar at least once a month is these folks definition of " bar hopping " !!
The original PSP showed that a sub standard home console game on a handheld is a compromise that pleases no one .
What I meant was that the possibility that under-monitoring might allow an atrocity is the price of freedom .
Staging a festival is a real big challenge and is only done successfully if you have large investment and experience of putting on smaller events such as club nights club tours etc. ..
This is only from my experience with greyhounds though - I appreciate that a terrier is a different proposition , and I have very little experience with JRTs .
Not too much poo here - 2 average size poos a day is all we get !
I never regreted taking him into my life for a moment , but a lot changed in my life in those 14 1 / 2 years and and at times life with a dog was a juggling act .
Family dog when i was a child was a ' Free to Good Home ' from an accidental litter Why did you buy and not rescue ?
A car is a lethal weapon in the hands of low life like this , i hope someone got the number to pass on to the police .
Talked too loud in a restaurant is all I can see .
Starting a business is a real personal commitment , think of it as rowing across the Atlantic , would you attempt it without preparation , the right tools and a GPS ( or compass and sextent if you are old school ) ?
My definition of a supercar is a high performance sports car .
A knight is a person granted an honorary title of knighthood by a monarch or other political leader for service to the monarch or country , especially in a military capacity .
Being a thief is all about quick opportunities .
Rightly so , a crisis is a crisis whatever the undxerlying problems are .
a gun is a lot blunter than a needle , think blunt force trauma , also the studs that they fire into the ear are not able to cope with excessive swelling , therefore in extreme cases can cause embedding of the back of the stud , also the guns are not able to be sterilised , therefore heightening the risk of hepatitis etc. http : / / tattoo .
Essex 's batting as a whole was a let-down last year but Westley , a former England Under 19 captain , feels the addition of overseas signing Alviro Petersen can really help him when the season starts on April 5 .
However , if perception matters , then I would say , a landline is a must .
An oranda is a type of goldfish characterized by a prominent raspberry-like hood encasing its head .
A monkey is a primate of the Haplorrhini suborder and simian infraorder , either an Old World monkey or a New World monkey , but excluding apes .
In its most general form , a nipple is a structure from which a fluid emanates .
In one sense , such a statement was a truism but the complacency it implies was misplaced .
Urinary tract infections : piperacillin or an aminoglycoside are the antibiotics of choice for severe infection .
Cool is a word that always crops up when people try to describe the films of Jim Jarmusch - but part of his coolness as a filmmaker is the aloof , oblique way in which he exposes the folly of his characters .
Not recommended ... basic hotel ... food is basic and choice is limited and repeated ... getting a drink is a joke as it is only one drink per person at bar if your party all want a drink you will all have to go to bar ... no hot water in room for 3 days ... room then flooded ... no entertainment and up a steep hill .
After skiing with a couple of other guys for the last few years and staying in apartments , this year we have a group of at least 8 and were thinking that a chalet is the way to go .
Novatech are usually pretty good here , but misjudging stock due by such a margin is a new one !
If we are just a few more , doing just one day a week is a great contribution .
" We are always exploring new ways of using the wealth of content PA generates on a daily basis , and producing an eBook is the ideal way of sharing hundreds of photos in a simple way .
Yes then if it does n't connect in their mind with words it 's a bit of pointless learning , but it will come in useful one day ; more useful than knowing a cat is a cat .
The loading bar for a mission is a red line at the bottom of the screen ( like in Hitman ) .
There is more on this in the help aimed at readers of the site : [ [ Help : Categories ] ] == Using categories == A category is a special page in the wiki , called " Category : Something " .
I wanted a career in science so a PhD was the logical step towards achieving this .
Yes , definitely - a PhD is a good grounding for any research career because it teaches you HOW to do research .
Price comparison site Tiger.co.uk commissioned the survey , which also found around one in five granddads thought a motorcycle was the best way to enjoy the countryside .
" I suspect , from what people who I spoke to said , that many thought having a mayor was an interesting concept .
And I do n't know the rules which apply but I just seem to recall that leaving the track to avoid a collision was a legitimate excuse .
Beware , a churn is a churn .
Failure to comply with a notice is a serious offence and is likely to lead to prosecution .
His attempt at growing a beard is a total failure .
this is our baby ... your baby is half of you and half of the person u love .. so anyhow my partner came around , as they usually do - and now hes actually becoming a little excited haha ... everything will work out fine , a baby is a god thing to happen ... u havent been diagnosed with a fatel disease ... ur giving life !!
Because after all , a home is the empty space of possibilities in which you write your life . ~ Dawn Ritchie .
The hotel as a package is a good price , very nicely decorated and kept clean and convenient for the underground picadilly line .
Man has always used the environment for his own ends and an estuary is a choice place for exploitation .
May I remind you that a llama is an animal like a small camel native to South America .
A person is a party to proceedings who has been named as a party on a statement of case irrespective of whether they have been served with that statement of case .
I always thought a pasty was a ladys undergarment and pastry was the food ...
I consistently anticipation a adhesive was a ladys undergarment and pastry was the food ...
" Another top night @ hashtagblank but Jesus tap dancing christ on a unicycle is the food expensive , burger and 2 slices of cake £ 9.50 !
A stroke is a brain attack which happens when the blood supply to the brain is cut off , caused by a clot or bleeding in the brain .
The first step toward a solution was the discovery by Tasco that PLCs from Omron can easily be connected to the load cells used by electronic weigh pans .
An asset is any single level resource reduced to its smallest valid size .
A proxy is a person chosen by you to vote on your behalf .
Obtaining a PhD was a long-time goal of mine , but I wanted to have some industrial experience to help direct my focus for graduate studies .
A thunderbox is a portable lavatory , complete with accessories .
A sponge is a collection of identical cells that exist as a colony .
455 almoner In modern times an almoner is a social worker in a hospital .
An escutcheon is a heraldic shield ; the Sword of Stalingrad displayed the king 's coat of arms .
A baldric is a belt worn from one shoulder , invariably the right , to the opposite hip on which the sword inside its scabbard can be hung .
488 Stele A stele is an ancient decorated stone slab .
But years of distress had exhausted their means ; and to remove any considerable number to so great a distance was a costly operation .
In other words a turbocharger is a mechanical pump designed to force-feed more air into the engine ; more air means more fuel , more power , more heat - and more strain on the mechanical parts of the engine .
In effect a turbocharger is a supercharger that is driven off the energy generated by the flow of exhaust gas , and differs from a supercharger which is mechanically driven from the engine by-way of belts , chains or gears , therefore using power from the engine to create more power .
In clinical trials comparing two or more interventions , a control is a person in the comparison group that receives a placebo , no intervention , usual care or another form of care .
In case-control studies a control is a person in the comparison group without the disease or outcome of interest .
The truth is Tim no one really knows whether buying a house is a plus or negative in todays world 30 years ago no contest , you would have been silly not to buy .
His example of youth participation in a response to an earthquake was a perfect illustration of how psychologists can use tools such as coaching to support community aims and increase psychological well-being among participants .
' The patient representative on the group , Fiona Shaw , said : ' Having a baby is a time of huge change - emotionally , financially , socially and physically - and any woman can find herself needing help .
Doing a PhD is a very hard process and during the three years that I studied , I do n't think there was a day where I did n't think about it .
A lead is a piece of information , usually a set of contact details , received from someone who has responded to the message and is interested in the product or service that was being offered .
A lead is a piece of information , usually a set of contact details , received from someone who has responded to the message and by doing so is showing an interest in the product or service that was being offered .
A person is a creator of his own actions .
Firstly , a sailor is a crew member and not a passenger who may have completed a few weekend cruises .
The most important factor in the longevity of a game is a healthy number of available servers .
Essentially an attempt to answer an original research question under the supervision of an established academic , a PhD is a rite of passage that can vary wildly depending on the way you work , the way your supervisor works , even the way your finances work .
But if not , £ 500,000 a year is a high price to pay for the level of monitoring that is likely to be required .
And I would argue a disfigured woman who was not loved as a child is a triple .
Fifty pounds a month was the sum suggested .
Fifty pounds a week was the sum suggested .
( In our above example , to describe the hand as ' beautiful ' , ' healthy ' or as ' real ' already belongs to one or other context . ) In many respects , the choice of a methodology is a development of the research itself and the learner is to be made aware of rather than adopt a specific methodology .
An example is the World Conference on Religion and Peace .
The passage in the gospels about " if thy hand offend thee , cut it off ; if thy foot offend they cut it off ; if thine eye offend thee , pluck it out " ( Mk 9:43 -49 ) referring to sins of sexuality ( masturbation , coitus [ a foot is a euphemism for a penis ] and merely looking lustfully ) is purely Essenic and exactly illustrates the anti-sexuality on which Christianity was built .
Writing an essay is a challenge for most students ; if they are given clear and precise guidelines , they are more likely to feel confident enough to focus on , and become involved and interested in , the content of their essay , and write a piece that is truly individual , not formulaic or worse .
strange that jumping from a height is a preffered method , as we all know a human does not have to fall far for it to be fatal .
A handyman is a person skilled at a wide range of repairs , typically around the home .
In today 's world a country 's the only assurance that Big Brother is n't going to do to you what it wishes ( like they did in Serbia ) is to have the nuke ( or oil , but there 's no such thing in Korea , is there ) .
Additionally he appears to be coughing a lot Are these the signs of something we should be worried about ??
A business is a machine for making money - it 's up to government to set the parameters for business in such a way that the environment is improved by their activities , rather than being wiped out , as is happening at the moment .
Subsection ( 2 ) inserts new paragraphs in Schedule 2 to enable secondary legislation to authorise or require registration officers to require an applicant or a registered elector to provide evidence of eligibility and that an applicant is the person named in the application .
First and foremost , a marriage is a partnership not a sacrifice !
A blog is an abbreviation of the term ' web log ' which is a relatively simple content management system .
Essentially , a typology is a pattern that repeats from the OT in the NT .
Such a structure is the antithesis of the situation in capitalism where the business of the state is performed behind closed doors by an unelected bureaucracy unaccountable to the people , while " Parliament is given up to talk for the special purpose of fooling the ' common people ' " , as Lenin put it .
In general , the extent of the arming of the people as a whole is a pretty sure measure of the progress towards proletarian democracy in the transition from capitalism to socialism .
A concentration is a topic that typically cuts across subfields and allows students to study an important substantive theme in greater depth .
A handshake is the usual form of of greeting between strangers meeting for the first time .
Such an act is a serious violation of the virtue of piety .
I 've no idea what an RTC is - a typo is a petty thing to pick up on , admittedly , but given John 's smug gloating over the supposed date error on our own website , I could n't resist .
Under section 1 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( ii ) , a company is a covered employer if it provides " service in connection with " rail transportation and if it is owned by or under common control with a rail carrier employer .
Very often the leaders in a denomination are the only ones to have a vision for evangelism .
The Grade I listed heritage garden includes an impressive array of shrubs and flowers , a highlight being the unique Quarry Garden with its ravines , pinnacles and exotic plants .
Because all the drops of water in a river are the river .
A selector is a mask describing rules to define and , applied to a pool of entities in order to filter it and obtain another more limited and more relevant pool .
Galileo discovered that the path of a projectile is a parabola , and he is credited with anticipating Isaac Newton 's laws of motion .
A hydrometer is an instrument used to measure the relative density of a liquid .
Also worth a visit is the Streetlife Museum of Transport with its exhibits and collections covering 200 years of transportation in Hull .
Using a condom is the best way to prevent any infection from being passed from one person to the other .
Decision A decision is a special case of conception where the output concept is a decision to take some action - usually , a choice made from a set of options .
Emotion An emotion is a special case of evaluation , in which the resulting goodness variable persists over time and is affected over time by factors particular to the type of emotion .
' A steak is a lump of muscle and any bugs will be on the outside .
" A 2010 decision from Washington state reached a similar conclusion -- unintentionally providing defective products to an installer was an " occurrence , " and removal and replacement of other suppliers ' products and work was " property damage .
Siting a landfill is a highly emotional issue , and people often look for alternatives to landfills .
Is not your belief in a living being an illusion ?
Most readers may have never heard the word , but to answer the question , a theremin is a musical instrument that originated in Russia .
The danger with a lagoon is the manure creates a crust on the top that may appear safe .
Registering a domain is the first step in building your website .
If a crewman was a hunter , the occasional reindeer , or ducks , sometimes improved the larder .
Look where we will , the inevitable law of revelation is one of the laws of nature : the lasting preservation of a secret is a miracle which the world has never yet seen .
' A bairn 's a bairn , for a ' that , And a ' that , and a ' that , A bairn 's a bairn , for a ' that ; Whoe ' er the lassie be .
An example is the agricultural techniques of American Indians of New England .
However , building such a culture is a long-term process , and educators should n't expect too much , too soon .
They might ask , How can a god be both all-powerful and all-knowing ?
What particularly gets the shell into a muddle is the way this recurses indefinitely : each time through the loop , it recurses through an another level of sourcing .
A leaker is a broken egg where the contents leak out of the shell .
Victorian sensibilities were not offended by the blatant racism of these performances but the fact that the players received a payment was another matter and in 1882 they were disbanded by order of the Sheffield FA .
Elliott 's first domicile as a spy was a soundproof cell in Wormwood Scrubs prison .
A miracle is an abrogation of the natural law .
A town is a coming-together of functions .
If you want to decide whether or not a group is a hate group , consider what they would be likely to do if they achieved absolute political power .
But changing the name of a utility is a simple matter : just rename the corresponding .
The difference between an employee and an entrepreneur is the way the person relates to the work , the business and the working business .
An entrepreneur is a negotiator , a visionary and a thinker .
Cancer in a parent is an issue that confronts many families .
A mandir is a center for realizing God .
A mandir is a place of parmount peace .
In any case , the main point is that this clearing out by a whip was a temporary action , designed for a specific purpose , not a permanent policy or institution .
A genome is the totality of genetic material in the DNA of a particular organism .
Time projection is not easy but working at a center with a partner is a lot more fun .
" Presidio neighbors care deeply that this national treasure retains strong public support and delaying a decision is the only way for the Board and public to make an informed decision about the site 's future , " said Bill Shepard , chair of the Neighborhood Associations for Presidio Planning .
A theist is a person who believes in a god or gods ; the term theism refers to this belief .
An object is an object is an object , not a copy or a representation .
Getting a shutout is the best feeling in the world for a defensive player .
An accord is an agreement by a creditor to accept less than bargained for from a debtor .
Now , not making a choice is not a choice , as not making a choice is a choice .
At 12:25pm on 15 Mar 2011 , Sasha Clarkson You need to read what I actually said in my post # 52 , I used the words Greens AND Eco-Terrorists , now just where did I say a Green was a terrorist , absolutely nowhere .
Thus the value of a company is the net present value of all the future cash less the cost of the shares .
Doing my GCSE maths , without a doubt is the hardest thing I have done to date .
I was under a lot of pressure from the university to take a year out or intercalate and just decided a wheelchair was the only way they would let me stay on the course .
In a society where many choose to remain childless and where availability of contraception and abortion was counted in the 1960 s as one of women 's triumphs and , indeed , human rights , it is impossible to argue that life without a baby is a condition for which there must be a remedy at all costs .
A period is the vaginal bleeding that women usually experience at regular intervals of about a month from puberty to menopause ( the end of periods that , on average , occurs in your early 50 s ) .
Knowing how to handle and lead a team is another .
A distributor is a person who sells the Earthly Clean products on their own to their own set of customers .
Herein lies the crucial distinction that regulatory authorities analyze when determining if a business is a pyramid scheme : the way compensation is rewarded .
Not only did Wayne 's presence mean that we saw many more birds than we would otherwise have seen -138 species in a week is a very good score for Taiwan in winter - but his assistance with matters such as navigation , finding accommodation , ordering food etc made the trip so much easier than it would otherwise have been .
More of an inconvenience was the all-pervading stink of sulphur , which got a little nauseating after a while , and prevented Eleanor from sleeping all night .
Playing a CD is a prime function for a Media Centre PC I would have thought , however , the support dept tell me none of their slim drive machines work , they 've been testing them with the CD .
No matter which mode you play in you 're going to get a top experience , it 's just that playing with a friend is a bit more dynamic , and of course you have someone to talk to while blasting away at enemies .
Travelling with them as an interpreter is a Jesuit priest .
I resisted commenting on the last one because it was based on an assumption is this article based on fact ?
Running out of fuel in a diesel is a pain bleeding it out ; best thing is keep an eye on the guage !
There are some shameful court cases which discriminate against women over men , there are juries who still believe that if a woman is a \ x 91 slut \ x 92 , wears \ x 91 tarty \ x 92 clothes , has slept with someone before , than it \ x 92 s not rape ( even if they realise it was against her will ) .
Using a Postcode is the way to make most effective use of this web site .
:D becoming a knight was a nice moment as well ( honoured i was ) !
The only evidence to show that I 'd had a Hysterectomy was a dressing over my stomach and a very minimal pain in my stomach .
Summer holidays , health reasons and weddings were the top three incentives to lose weight and 43 per cent of the female population said not feeling comfortable in a swimsuit was the main reason for wanting to streamline their look .
To behave in such a way is the Government 's prerogative , but it perhaps bodes ill for genuine dialogue on crucial issues .
However , as the cliché goes , a week is a long time in politics .
A gene is a subsection of a chromosome which encodes the value of a single parameter being optimized .
Less of an issue is the lack of a rev counter , but this is the first car I have ever driven without one .
' Doing ' a PhD is a life changing activity .
Something that has been bugging me for a while is the lack of careers advice I was given at uni .
An alternative is the Lakeland Dye Grabber which lasts for up to 30 washes .
Becoming a parent is a daunting prospect for anyone , but it could be argued that for private bankers the imminent patter of tiny feet might be even more fraught with worry as they ponder how to balance a demanding career with family life .
If the jury had accepted that such a belief was a reasonable possibility they would have had to acquit him on both counts , and in his summing up the trial judge so directed them in accordance with the decision of this House in R v Taaffe [ 1984 ] AC 539 .
Bookwoves - A bulky paper usually used for novels , books containing text only or where the bulk of a book is a priority .
The C 1 is actually quite heavy , but more of a problem is the unsuitability of its layout in respect of pushing .
" Often a childminder is a very good option because they can offer the one-to-one care needed in many circumstances , " Lewis says .
This extravagant confection of a building is the Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum .
A community is an ACTUAL group of people living in an area who interact with eachother not a never ending group of people tapping away into the ether having no idea what the others look like or if they are telling the truth about themselves .
In addition to keeping the spread-sheet up to date you 'll need to create your own invoices , a Word document set up as a template is a simple way to do this .
A dividend is the distribution of ' after-tax profits ' , so it 's essential that the company has sufficient retained profits to pay a dividend .
The hardest issue for those thinking about saving for a pension is the effect it will have on means tested benefits - like pensions credit - in retirement .
Whilst a draw is a perfectly acceptable result , I ca n't help but feel disappointed that it was n't three .
You 'd have to say a draw was a fair result simply because for all of our possession , Leeds had the two best chances which tells you everything you need to know .
I do n't think it 's right for anyone to say that a man who spent a lot of his life in the Air Force , becoming a Doctor , and then serving as a congressman is a part of the illuminati .
RIDING a bike in a bunch is a rough and tumble affair , not for the faint-hearted .
4.16 Getting a job is the most effective route out of low income , but one in five low-income households remains stuck on low income even though all the working-age adults in their household have jobs .
A condom taped to a t-shirt is a direct and blatant reference to a sexual act , that has no place on an aircraft , unless it is a totally private flight .
Under the Labour government , becoming an academy was an option for failing schools to turn themselves around independently of their council .
Cruach Ardrain has serious crags to weave your way up among ; Beinn a ' Chroin offers a small scramble as you penetrate its western cliffs ; and the summit ridge of An Caisteal is a romantic toytown of wiggly paths and silly little rockforms .
An Caisteal is the best of all these hills for sheer playfulness in little towers and ridge wiggles .
A station is a key link to the outside world .
Users who find a useful product should have easy ways of returning to it , of which being able to bookmark one page as the entry point to a site is the most basic .
An image is a perfectly respectable function from x * y coordinate space into color space ( or color + alpha , if you have transparency ) .
Who decided a gun is a fundamental human right ?
Remotely operating such a device is an easy task because the controls , which are provided in the body coordinate frame , map intuitively into a world frame .
The greatest inspiration for my career as a geologist was the relationship my family and I had with the land while I was growing up .
A liger is the result of breeding a male lion to a tigress .
A tigon is the result of breeding a male tiger to a lioness .
A tigon is the product of a male tiger and female lion .
A citizen is a member of a particular nation who has been given certain rights , privileges , and immunities that are not given to people of other nations .
Buying a home is an investment .
While you should make a great investment decision on buying a house , I think a house is a rotten investment if you 're going to live in it .
A divorce is the breakdown club drugs ?
Going through a divorce is a very and you 've got to ask yourself , if it 's really possible for you to forgive your partner ?
A wxSVGFileDC is a device context onto which graphics and text can be drawn .
A divorce is the ending is the fastest way to obtain the desired record .
A stride is the measured distance between successive imprints of the same paw .
Failing to pass a budget is irresponsible , but refusing to even debate a budget is an absolute failure of leadership .
There 's nowhere you can go after that - one is no longer a threat and an army is a repeat of what we 've already seen .
" he asked rhetorically , " A family is an icon ; it 's an image of the blessed Trinity , and so the devil hates the family .
Now such a person is the notorious Ischyras , who was never appointed to his office by the Church , and when Alexander admitted the Presbyters that had been ordained by Meletius , he was not even numbered amongst them ; and therefore did not receive ordination even from that quarter .
Foreseeing these things , and reflecting that the entrance of enemies into a place is no ordinary calamity , we protested against this commission .
I meet some people who say they need what I have but them showing up at a talk is another matter .
The decision by the BCHR 's general assembly to raise a case was a bid to test the extent of reforms and independence of the judiciary .
A record is a record .
I would say that a diglot is a whole book , but I can imagine someone else saying it is a pamphlet , or even a single page with one chapter of text .
Opinions may differ about what constitutes " a reasonably normal and healthy existence " , and we do not propose to say if the possession of a television set or a car is an ingredient nowadays of a reasonably normal existence .
A tank is a tracked vehicle .
An essay is a structured document that is drafted with an aim of answering an essay question .
One of the greatest surprises for Christians going through a divorce is the reaction of the Christian community .
That ruddy inch and a bit was a deal breaker for me unfortunately , which was a huge shame because it is an excellent buggy .
" It is a tail worth reading as he encounters many creatures that are different personas of man , horse , dog , etc. This is a part is a series by the writer that brought us " Tarzan .
Could have been a dishwasher , toaster , washing machine ... choose any white goods you like :D A dolt is a klutz ... a bit of an idiot ?
An abortion is the purposeful ending of a baby 's life but is just described as " cells " .
An embryo and / or a foetus is a different entity to a child , legally , morally , physically and every other way I can think of .
Evidence in favour of a conspiracy is a mixed bag , at best .
While the ACN said the use of the military for elections in a democracy was an anomaly , the CPC said it was the duty of the police to ensure there was adequate security during the polls .
It said : " Also of great concern to us as a party is the effect the deployment of troops will have on the polity .
A diary is a reliable narrator , a reliable indication of the voice inside the character 's head , but a blog is n't necessarily .
Mucocele : A mucocele is a collection of mucoid fluid from a blocked sinus which forms an expansile mass .
Rhinolith : A rhinolith is a rock which forms in the nose .
Frontal Sinus Osteoma : An osteoma is a benign slowly growing bone tumor .
A fav is a compliment , take it a it is .
Anything equal to a number is a number .
I am surprised that someone who claims to be the age that you are appears to have entirely forgotten the 70 s and 80 s , when the UK went through a lengthy , protracted and painful process of de-industrialisation , but one of the consequences of that change was the loss of a lot of skilled manual roles and their replacement with jobs for which a degree is a requirement .
In spite of these flaws , the book as a whole is a very well-documented exposé of the ongoing world revolution of cosmopolitan finance .
I hardly call my little opinions prophecy , and a column is a perfect vehicle for crying " It 'll never work !
It is simply to aver that in all of general medicine , deciding that a condition is an instantiation of disease depends on certain kinds of value judgments .
If can summarise by saying , IMO of course dear RZNers ; communist China as a country is a wicked , evil , oppressive system , based on a Satanic agenda written by Khazarian Jews .
A person is a person , love who you want .
I believe " A person is a person , regardless of biological gender or the gender with which they identify .
A person is a person , regardless of biological gender or the gender with which they identify .
To say that his consumption of fat was in and of itself a disease is a pretty wild leap of logic , though I 'm sure more than a few twisted Twelve Steppers , being highly skilled in fallacious assumption and used to accepting logical non sequiturs as valid , would advocate that position .
A fungus is a kind of primitive plant that lacks energy-producing chlorophyll , and instead lives as a parasite .
KEPLER 'S LAWS OF PLANETARY MOTION I PLANETS MOVE IN ELLIPTICAL ORBITS AROUND THE SUN , WHICH OCCUPIES ONE FOCUS OF THE ELLIPSE An ellipse is a flattened circle whose properties are governed by two ' foci ' , or focal points , equidistant from its centre .
Incidentally , Rossi 's blog called " Journal for Nuclear Physics " recently argued that a neutron is a bound state of a proton and selectron !
Perhaps a scamfraud is a person that makes up scams and trys to get sympathy for themselves .
Oath An oath is a sworn statement , affirmation , or pledge , usually based upon religious principles and often used in legal matters .
Buses are fine for those people that have nothing better to do but if you have to be somewhere as soon as possible a vehicle is an essential not a luxury .
However , whereas a colonia was a town created for retired legionaries ( by definition , Roman citizens ) , the rank of municipium conferred some privileges of citizenship to an existing town ( hence , a municipium was of lower status than a colonia ) .
I think the most concerning point of the articles here is the notion that anyone approaching a child is a predator like poor Edwin in America .
In fact a URL is a subset of a Uniform Resource Identifier ( URI ) along with a Uniform Resource Name ( URN ) .
For VoIP calls , as an individual is the recipient of a call rather than the company , URIs are used as the address .
A soliton is a wave that does not broaden or lose its shape when travelling in a medium .
In communications , a soliton is a light pulse of special shape propagating in monomode fibre .
Not that locking a wheel is any big deal on a trike ...
Recall that a gadget is a windowless object that relies on its parent to provide it with events generated either by the system or by the user 4 .
If you run Example 12 -4 , you may find that you get mixed messages about whether an action is a single or double mouse click .
A RadioBox is a group of ToggleButtons in which only one may be on at any given time .
A CheckBox is a group of ToggleButtons in which each ToggleButton may be set independently of the others .
A value is a deeply held belief about the way the world ought to be .
When I told my husband this , he said , ' Ah , but a tripod is the most stable structure .
Standing on a scale is a problem for physically disabled or older people .
An illustration is the problem of copyright law .
The same does not apply to an illness were the diagnosis has not been positively confirmed " .
A ComboBox is a component which combines direct textual entry with the convenience of list selection .
Finding a stop is a tricky task to perform without sight .
It can be difficult to tell if a pole , lamp post with bin or a shelter is the bus stop e.g. some are on lampposts not at shelters so a VIP may not be sure if they are at the bus stop .
The Display object provides two resources that can be set to indicate which protocol the toolkit should use when an application is the initiating or the receiving application in a drag and drop transfer .
Depending on whether a file is a regular file or a directory , the application places an image of a file or a folder next to the filename Label .
" A defibrillator is a small piece of medical equipment designed to save someone 's life if they are in sudden cardiac arrest by giving them a shock of electricity .
An O-ring is an O-ring so long as it 's a a reasonable quality .
ALPHINGTON manager John Moore is backing his players to perform on Saturday against Liverton United , but admitted even a draw is a big ask against the reigning champions .
Everyone who writes book a day is a very bad author .
( need I say more ?! ) * Buffy ( Buffy ) - it 's odd when the main character on a tv-show is the most irritating of the whole regular cast .
Being fingered is one thing , and being penetrated by a penis is a completely different thing .
A PATIENT is a PERSON .
A PATIENT is a PERSON with a specific disease or condition who receives treatment from a Health Care Provider or any REGISTRABLE BIRTH .
Anyone think it is funny that a man is the one leaping for joy on the ' I want to get a pay raise ' goal ?
Leaving the scene of an accident is a crime ( AFAIK ) if someone or animal was injured .
Definately works , but they tend to nip the tail at times 2nd fly to get a chase was the Red tag ( nice 6.5 lb TL ) and tonight a big Mullet chased and hammered my point fly ... a Corophium .
A signature is the best way of evidencing the consultation and agreement of a service user or their representative .
Median costs for the life of a catheter were the same in both cases .
4.7 The fact that a case is the subject of a criminal prosecution does not prevent a disciplinary hearing from taking place and a decision being taken as to whether the case is proven on the balance of probabilities and sanctions being imposed .
Half a crown was a lot of money , we needed a complimentary ticket but we were able to go .
Also causing a stir was the Chinook HC 2 display which in the end deservedly won the Steedman Display Sword for the best UK based display participant .
Buying a home is a life-changing event and understandably , some buyers may be apprehensive of taking the plunge .
A doula is a professional individual who does not help in childbirth but acts as a support for the mother .
If the Parliament acts as a parliament of independent-minded men and women , then a parliament is the finest thing you can have .
The beadle 's staff at a door was the sign of a funeral , and the beadle walking before the humble burial party gave it , in the eyes of the poor , the character of a sacred procession .
I thought a magnet was a magnet , whatever ...
Working 7 days a week is a normal thing for me !
> Floor area ( in sq ft ) : n / a repair is the size of an iron > Job start date : ASAP > The client is looking for : To have just an idea of the price > Services required : Repair > Property type : House ...
some people seem to think that a remap is the be all and end all of diesel tuning , but there are many many more people out there that know you do n't have to chuck 100 's at some one with a lap top to get more out of their TDI .
The bit about people having a moan was a general comment and was n't directed at yourself .
@ MarkoosMuse - Well the thing is that Sweeny Todd was an adaptation of the highly acclaimed and multi-award-winning 1979 musical by Stephen Sondheim , so it being a musical was the whole point .
An encyclopaedia is an encyclopaedia .
An encyclopaedia is a selection of knowledge which can be USED to educate someone .
A window is an eye through which the wind blows .
A sieve is a receptacle but it would n't work as a boat unless you 're a ...
A camera is another must have for any modern tablet and fortunately the Nexus 7 ticks this box too with its 1.2 MP forward facing camera .
If you need to know how much electricity is going to a certain point then a multimeter is a better bet .
In 40 BC , the Parthian satrap ( a satrap was the governor of a territorial allotment within the kingdom ) , Barzapharnes , strengthened by one of the king 's sons , Pacorus , seized Syria and advanced on the land of Israel .
That 's not necessarily a bad thing , although why Facebook and Twitter come in for a broadside is a little odd .
It represents a seated male figure with a glory round his head , his right hand elevated , and in his left an orb , while underneath him in a niche is the figure of a praying monk .
The motive is always the same : a population is the victim of a dictator , so we must act .
The current furore surrounding the recent admission by American singer / songwriter Jennifer Knapp that she is a lesbian is a sad phenomenon .
It is not an offence to " explore " ( ie visit ) such sunken wrecks - although entering and interfering without a licence is an offence .
It seems to me that during a recession is an ideal time to initiate projects like fixing the roadsigns , so that by the time the recession is over the conversion job would be a distant memory and our workforce would be more familiar with distances in km and speeds in km / h then they are now .
Sweaty palms , shaking hands and the inability to form a sentence are some of the most common symptoms .
So although a netbook is no real rival for an entry-level laptop , they do make a great mobile accessory .
The cause of a crime is a criminal , May begins .
An alternative is the multiple of in-situ value at which recent trade sales of mines have taken place .
For example , we can express the structural information that a person has a single age , and that age is counted in whole numbers ( i.e. it takes an integer value ) ; and we can express the semantic information that a student is a kind of person , and therefore also has an ' age ' .
A bibliography is a structured version of the results of a past search .
An example is the ANLI system which provides an additional facility in an online catalogue and allows users to insert links between books ( Kantor , 1993 ; Zhao and Kantor , 1993 ) .
A rating is an indication of the usefulness , interest or quality of a document as viewed by a user .
An example is the GroupLens system ( Resnick et al. , 1994 ) which allows collaborative filtering of Usenet Netnews articles by allowing users to assign ratings on a 5 - point scale .
A riff is a short , repeating musical phrase that forms a structural basis or hook for your song .
A megatrend is a long term change term change that will permanently and significantly alter society of the economy .
A town was an enclosure surrounded by a hedge or a palisade .
The whole of such an area was a township .
I know looks are n't everything but the first thing you see before viewing a profile is the member 's photo .
A calculator is a must-have list for anyone in business .
A pre-order is a type of order you make for an item that is not in stock .
The choice is yours , but it 's important to remember that a firewall is a great tool for fighting malware if you wield it well .
royalty - a royalty is the commission paid to an author whenever a book is sold .
A workshop is a collaborative forum where participants ( typically 15 to 30 ) meet to exchange opinions , present ideas , and discuss preliminary results on a focused topic .
Also available on a cartridge was an optional CP / M co-processor .
From their experiences and oral histories , local people understood that the only men who fetched fuel wood or water for a living were those who worked as slaves or servile labourers in the more affluent households .
A common thing to include in a website is a header section .
A modem is a unique peripheral device , because it makes use of two-way communication , sending and receiving data to and from the computer .
A clock made it possible to time and date stamp files , and identify which version of a file was the most recent .
An example is a virtual elevator ride .
If an editor is an authority on your own topic , you may receive special advice and assistance .
However , the presumption of civilian status in IHL states that in case of doubt as to whether a civilian or an individual is a combatant or a civilian , he or she should be treated as a civilian .
A subshell is a set of electrons that all have the same value of ( azimuthal quantum number ) .
If a child is that allergic , then perhaps they should be homeschooled to protect them .
His career as a soldier was every way creditable to him , as the following extract from a letter from Major Joseph Hayes of the Eighteenth Regiment will testify .
Any only claiming such a thing is a LIAR .
In agricultural regions , the crop that produces the highest return at a location is the crop that farmers will choose to grow there .
Getting a " moderate consensus " among respondents of posts that would prompt an investigation were a scenario of a physician 's blog that used potential patient identifiers and a vignette about discriminatory language on a doctor 's Facebook page .
The laws of a nation are a clear reflection of its culture and thus the west should not be in a hurry to condemn this .
What is evil is evil ... what is abnormal is abnormal ... what is a disease is a disease ...
An example is the case of the musical saw players of Wainwright on the northwest Arctic coast .
Aug 19 ( ST ) The preparation of a budget is a difficult task at the best of times .
In Jaxen terms a number is a java .
To a certain extent such a situation is the most post-modern of outcomes .
BEHOLD THE EGG Learning to cook an egg is a master class in deliciousness .
A demise is a kind of value .
I suspect that informed consent regarding the use of tissue originally removed in the course of a patient is a fairly recent concern , owing mainly to concerns over genetic discrimination .
Inflecting the function name into a description is a legacy implementation detail that need not be cargo-culted in flexible languages ( such as JavaScript ) .
" Today , even people in small villages know that a constitution is the way for democracy .
Getting on the backside of a storm is a great place to capture lightning and all though we did n't get a ton of CG ( cloud to ground lightning ) to work with , I managed to get this one before we called it a night .
The problem in a nutshell is this : Inequality in this country has hit a level that has been seen only once in the nation 's history-at the end of the 1920 s .
Just as much of a problem is the regular harvesting of the data .
A duck is a kind of animal .
A box is a kind of container .
Half a wheel is a lot to eat every night .
Pilgrim : One of the interesting things ( critics say ) is the idea that we 're a shrine to racism - in a very real sense , that 's like saying a hospital is a shrine to disease .
CASTRO : A misdemeanor is a criminal offense , but it 's far less severe than his original rape charge .
Whoring , mother Nanna reminds daughter Pippa , is n't easy : " So , you see , becoming a whore is no career for fools , well I know it ...
An author is the person who has an author 's " I " , i.e. the person who writes like no one else could .
Seriously though , every performance of a raga is a unique attempt .
So how much of a rumor is this now that an announcement of festival dates without a location is official ?
This may not seem special but , trust me , such an organisation is a rarity .
A collision is a situation where two or more names would abbreviate to the same code using these rules .
It 's all very well , but there are certain circumstances - a war is a typical example - where you ca n't do that .
on the plus side , good to see kipnis coming back around , and of course a win is a win .
While an ebook is a quick and easy product to download and start reading , a large video course like the ones we sell here present a few challenges .
A well is a fixed in place container in the Pumping House .
Circling all this at a distance was a sauce of chopped apple in an apple cider brown butter , equally good with either of the two elements and more than amicable next to a smmartly chosen wine , the lightly oaked 2010 Sketches Chardonnay from Tawse , in Niagara .
Serving the dish in a bowl was a deliberate act on lepine 's part .
However , it is , perhaps , more difficult to assess whether an employee is an apprentice , long-term unemployed or has been in the company for many years .
Graphics feel a bit clumsy and exploring the island gets tedious in no time ; every person in a car is an enemy ( are there any civilians or is driving a car a purely bad guy occupation ? ) All together , this could have been great but I am afraid it 's nothing more than a missed opportunity .
An t-Aigeach is the high cliff rearing up midway along the path .
One of the biggest obstacles to turning a profit is the fact that people have accepted unlimited access without paying a penny - so in theory , it should benefit websites that have free access .
Often the emotion displayed by a bedwetter is a reasonable response to the bedwetting itself .
If you do n't visit the Iris you 're holiday will always be missing that special something - a visit is a must !!
It is undeniable that to have material withheld from his legal representatives as well as himself and to have his interests represented only by an SAA is a substantial handicap to a prisoner in a hearing before the Parole Board .
With certain but unusable proof that an individual is a terrorist , governments and their agents have once again resorted to more extreme measures , drafting such legislation as the US Patriot Act and the UK Terrorism Act .
The lack of a definition was a big problem for a lot of people who did not really know what cohesion meant .
' The Minister himself could not resist a smile at this , and the visitor added somewhat hastily , ' Yet I say wi ' Robbie Burns -- " a man 's a man for a ' that .
Indeed , to bribe the boy with the promise of a book was the only way of inspiring in him the love of scriptural learning .
It supports the concept of an article being a single blog post , rather than a ' document site ' and displays a variety of citation formats for readers to use .
A memorial is any object placed upon the ground above a grave .
We still come back to the view that a commissioner is the best way of addressing the interests of older people .
A : As we showed in the example above , inurl : mydom ain.com just searches for " mydomain " and " com " showing up adjacent to each other in a url-there 's no requirement that the url has to be on mydomain.com .
A Symposium is a collection of Brief Papers on a theme that has been coordinated and led by the symposium 's leader(s) .
His book Anatomy of a Beast is an in-depth look at the origins of the Bigfoot mythology that culminated in the Patterson-Gimlin film .
Paul leans socially conservative , he has had unsubstantiated accusations of racism , and certainly holds the more extreme view of embrionic rights , via the ridiculous fiction that an embryo is a human being .
The natural object most commonly mistaken for a UFO is the planet Venus .
Well , yes a cure is a very clear observable benefit of research , but realize that a cure only benefits those with one particular disease , which is a very tiny fraction of people .
A shura is a committee of scholars , alas , traditionally men .
The shape of objects within an Rframe is the main property used in Rframe management , and it is represented using moment invariants .
Shutting the door on livelihoods and businesses on a whim is a mark of irresponsibility if you ask me .
( An exam session held at the close of a class is a separate event and may or may not include the same roster of participants .
In the 1970 s , 50,000 deaths in Vietnam over most of a decade were a politically unsustainable national tragedy ; now circa 4,500 in Iraq are .
Every genuine test of a theory is an attempt to falsify it , or to refute it .
The problem with being a conservative is the establishment media .
Each edition of a carnival is a magazine , a snapshot of the moment , and a repository of pieces that both their authors ( by submitting ) and hosts ( by accepting ) thought were good and important .
A book is a result of a large investment of time , money and effort - either bottom-up , by the author ( sometimes perceived as a result of a big ego ) , or top-down , with an editor choosing what material is worth the investment .
But focusing on that goal is misguided - a blog is a place to think in public .
Blogs have been around for fifteen years , they are not so novel any more , it 's easy to see if a place is a blog , if it reads like a blog , and one should know what one should expect on a blog .
If a blog is a certain type of content , then since it 's not bound by any specific styles , rules , etc , there is no longer any differences between a blog post and a " normal " article .
And how honorable a station are those men placed in , by the providence of God , whose business it is to secure to men this rational liberty , and to promote the happiness and welfare of society , by suppressing vice and immorality , and by honoring and encouraging everything that is honorable , virtuous , and praiseworthy !
So long as a man is a good member of society , he is accountable to God alone for his religious sentiments ; but when men are found disturbers of the public peace , stirring up sedition , or practicing against the state , no pretense of religion or conscience ought to screen them from being brought to condign punishment .
That the right to a sexuality is a human right ?
The condition for an extremity is the situation according to FIG 68 .
The determination of the extent or duration of a disability is a question of fact .
A corporation is a perfect example of this where one can succeed and move up the hierarchy as long as one fulfills the needs of the corporation but if one challenges the system , then you could be ejected and possibly blacklisted from entry into other corporations .
But regardless of the supposed source of the excess lending , should n't the Keynesian argument be : if there was a bubble , a recession was the result because the Fed tightened to combat inflation ?
Because cutting a coconut is a very simple and safe procedure .
Sometimes an inch is all you need .
Other superheroes well worth a mention are the animate-inanimate couple Scarlet Witch and The Vision : a witch married to a ' synthetic human ' .
A ninth is a fugitive .
John : [ laughs ] Well , I would say the transitionary solution for that is essentially what we have always done with scheduling scripts is that if a scene is outside day it 's a certain color , and if a scene is another thing it 's a different color .
I mean , certainly an iPhone is a great screen for it .
A cycloid is the locus of a point on a circle that rolls along a line .
Whether Sibley had authority to appoint such a commission is a matter of substantial dispute .
( An exception is the melodic , danceable " The Elephant Fell to Earth . " ) Second Dan is good with the occasional acoustic ballad too - the rich concoction called " Everything Is Good " suggests Radiohead .
Given that reviews in the most venerated of book reviewing venues in the USA , i.e. the New York Times do n't have much impact on sales than what kind of an impact is an individual reader 's review on Amazon , or Goodreads , or wherever going to have ?
Jones : ( Shouts , preacher 's voice ) Anyone in America who 's poor - white , brown , yellow , or black - and does not admit that he 's a nigger is a damn fool .
When asked if what I said about my parents getting a divorce was a story or the truth , I said a story .
And Mark , do you think that the idea that the Millennium Dome is an excrescence is a doxa in need of deconstruction ?
Since eating meat daily is associated with all kinds of disease , most prominently heart problems , eating vegetarian at least a few times a week is a health choice .
A downside is the longer turnaround time and the expense of doing larger runs , plus having to store all the extra prints .
c 3 * 4 * Copyright ( C ) 1996 -1997 Paul H. Hargrove 5 * This file may be distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License 6 * 7 * Original code to handle the new style Mac partition table based on 8 * a patch contributed by Holger Schemel ( emailblank ) 9 * 10 * " XXX " in a comment is a note to myself to consider changing something 11 * 12 * In function preconditions the term " valid " applied to a pointer to 13 * a structure means that the pointer is non-NULL and the structure it 14 * points to has all fields initialized to consistent values 15 * 16 * The code in this file initializes some structures which contain 17 * pointers by calling memset ( & foo , 0 , sizeof(foo) ) 18 * This produces the desired behavior only due to the non-ANSI 19 * assumption that the machine representation of NULL is all zeros 20 * / 21 22 hashtagblank " hfs.h " 23 24 / * = = = File-local data types = = = * / 25 26 / * 27 * The Macintosh Driver Descriptor Block 28 * 29 * On partitioned Macintosh media this is block 0 30 * We really only need the " magic number " to check for partitioned media 31 * / 32 struct hfs_drvr_desc { 33 hfs_word_t ddSig ; / * The signature word * / 34 / * a bunch more stuff we do n't need * / 35 } ; 36 37 / * 38 * The new style Mac partition map 39 * 40 * For each partition on the media there is a physical block ( 512 - byte 41 * block ) containing one of these structures .
And as was true after Black Hills , finishing a book is an exhausting moment .
A report that a justice of the Supreme Court said such a thing is a serious allegation , yet Lazarus gives no specifics as to time , place , and names of witnesses .
A pool is a relatively recent addition .
Conveying credibility through a Website is a challenge we all face , but Web professionals are a unique case .
The Holy Trinity St. Sergius Lavra ( a lavra is a major monastery-only four monasteries in Russia have that designation ) , north of Moscow , is perhaps Russia 's most famous pilgrimage site .
So I do n't know where the AMA saying that obesity is a disease is that helpful , but I do think that at least that says no , you ca n't be healthy at any size .
For many theatres , the " safe " show that is guaranteed not to be a flop is the show they loathe most doing , because it 's often mainstream , or repetitive ( think A Christmas Carol or The Nutcracker ) .
The initial process in the commutation of tithes in a parish was an agreement between the tithe-owners and landowners or , in default of agreement , an award by the Tithe Commissioners .
" The process of being a journalist is the process of educating yourself in something new , all the time , " he said .
Ten new customers a day is a pretty good accomplishment for any new product or service .
The only stand-out memory I have of a lawnmower is the one time my father decided to take a short-cut down our neighborhood 's hill - " Killer Hill , " as we affectionately call it-on his way to groom a vacationing neighbor 's lawn .
Maybe I should have known better , but I sort of expected a discussion board thread entitled " Greatest Wheels " to be a survey of forumites ' favorite automobiles , but-this being an industrial design discussion-it actually refers to the wheels themselves ( taking wheels to mean a car is an example of synecdoche , by the way ) .
I was around lies from a very young age , had various parents and step-parents who would Cause A Scene at the mention of each other , and quickly learnt that there were situations where an omission or a lie was the most likely thing to avoid severe unpleasantness .
But it seems that if teachers having to teach to a test is a big concern , the real issue of getting the curriculum standards coordinated would resolve that problem .
An observatory is a building that houses ground-based telescopes used to gather data and make observations .
If a report is the first report filed by a committee , the report shall include all information required under subsection 1 covering the period from the beginning of the committee 's financial activity , even if from a different calendar year , through the end of the current reporting period .
If you think about it , in classical music and jazz music the idea of a solo is the moment where the instrument gets a chance to shine a bit more .
Such a package is a bit cumbersome to inspect and understand for each source tree modification later .
All agree that the connection of a boy nine years and a day is a real connection ; whilst that of one less than eight years is not ( 2 ) ; their dispute refers only to one who is eight years old .
And the last time he recited into a videocamera was the pilot episode when he 's going , " This is not an admission of guilt !
A lion in a cage is a very different creature from a lion in the wilderness .
Transportation of the juvenile to and from a facility is the responsibility of the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction where the offense was committed .
( C ) No adjudication by the court of the status of a child is a conviction , nor does the adjudication operate to impose civil disabilities ordinarily resulting from conviction , nor may a child be charged with crime or convicted in a court , except as provided in Section 63-19-1210 ( 6 ) .
( E ) Incident reports in which a child is the subject are to be provided to the victim of a crime pursuant to Section 16-3-1520 .
This post sex tape reaction by a woman is the first of its kind and sets itself apart from the long list of Z-list celebrities famous for nothing but sex .
Another principal worth a mention was the Firebird ( ALEXANDRA TIMOFEYEVA ) who 's grand jetes were sublime .
But a meeting is a meeting .
An impeachment is a trial of a high officer of state for maladministration of his office .
Even in palatial buildings there was not more than one lavatory , and that too of the primitive type , and a bath-room was a luxury to be met with only at the houses of those who were doubly blest with wealth as well as the sense of personal hygiene .
What finally gave theology a heart was a major breakthrough starting in the 8th Century by a class called the prophets .
However it very soon became evident that this was entirely at the discretion of the host and indeed receiving a prize was no guarantee that you also had the sole rights of ownership from that moment as the host was quite likely to favour another competitor , strip one of the prize and pass it on to his favourite .
A twitch is an involuntary muscle movement caused by the firings of an overwrought nervous system .
The best spa I found within a hotel is the charming BAGLIONI SPA ( 020 7368 5923 / uriblank at that famous boutique hotel and celeb haunt THE BAGLIONI in Kensington .
Perhaps that is why a Scorpio in a relationship is the sign capable of the greatest metamorphosis and renewal .
Littlejohn lists these fetishes for two main reasons : one ; to make Gay , Bisexual or Transgender people sound as perverted as Mail readers assume those who practice those fetishes to be , and two ; to make it seem as if being Gay is a behaviour that one can choose not to indulge in - with the implicit assumption that to indulge in such a behaviour is a perversion .
A diary is a great stress reliever ; instead of sitting around worrying about something you can just get it written down and off your chest .
No , a man is a Jew if he is one inwardly ; and circumcision is circumcision of the heart , by the Spirit , not by the written code .
A carrycot is an easy and flexible way of transporting your baby , as it can be used as part of a pram or on its own at home .
Little did anyone suspect that when Brandon Greenwood made his competitive debut on this very stage , he would be back little more than a year later as guest star ; from first-timer to Universe champion in less than a year is some feat of achievement .
The first prayer I learned as a child was the Ashem Vohu .
Being able to access and compare historical data at the touch of a button is a really useful feature , so you can track how your electricity use changes over time .
" If they ( donors ) are tapped out a bit is a good question .
( beat ) Because writing about a boy is the next best thing to being one .
First , a word is a group of letters and learning a word entails learning how those letters are grouped together .
Then a word is a label for a shared meaning .
Last but not least , a word is a trigger for all the personal internal experiences I link to that word .
Just like tasting exquisite wine , sniffing divine fragrances for an hour was a true delight .
Now recognising an oik is a skill , for they are masters of disguise , and they really do appear to be normal on the outside .
" That 's what it 's about , a win 's a win , " said a relieved Egyptian afterwards .
The problem in that reasoning is that , inversely , an enormous amount of diverse defect genes in a population is a quite natural thing and warrants a low rate of sick progeny !
The technical definition of a percentile is the value of a variable below which a specified percentage of the data occurs .
A menu is the foundation of any restaurant ; Guests will support or avoid a restaurant for its food .
An example is the development of a new microprocessor for a mobile phone to give it access to the Internet .
Miss Lewis said : " I am not a racist , I am a racial survivalist and anyone who calls me a racist is a genocideist ( sic ) .
So the general format for a session is an extended warm up including plenty of run specific strengthening drills and run technique work , followed by a mix of easy and tempo running on grass with some speed development work on the track or hill .
Reassurance from a teacher was an important thing especially when it came in such a cool and calm voice that made me want to - well I 'm sure you get the picture .
Making a show is a bit like that simple board game Mastermind .
The Springer did n't know any better , it is the closest it will ever get to working in the field and probably the only chance it will get to working with a gun is the owners sons BB gun .
The dictionary ( any one it does n't matter ) makes a Prior in charge of a Priory and a Priory is a portal to an Abbey ( Sorry the dictionary says so ) .
A priory is a house of men or women under religious vows headed by a prior or prioress .
Life itself is precious and full of worth - and to be born partially to try to help a sibling is a most noble thing - and the child will surely never be short of dinner party conversation ...
Gratitude is the incumbent virtue in such a case , and a benefactor is the object of that virtue 6 .
Q 66 Chair : But not by 60 % in a year is the not unreasonable point I am making .
It seems to me that the only people who should prefer a dividend are those that really do need the income to live off .
In terms of regulation 15 , the maker of a database is the first owner of database right in it .
Hypothetically , I guess that limited implementation versus a choice-made-upon-nothing is a fine idea , but I do n't know it can be actually put in practice .
What a pain being a woman .
So - a shaman was a druid , a witch was a druid , a seer was a druid and so on .
Another side to have gone up a league is the Under 11 s and for a start they found life tough but since the enforced winter break they have turned things around and are now holding a mid table position .
A network is a way of connecting all the computers in your business together .
A server is a central computer used to store files and run the network ..
A hub is a simpler piece of equipment without the ability to manage network traffic .
And here in a nutshell is the demonstration that one single thing is unaffectable : there is nothing into which an element which is one single thing may change or by which it may be affected .
My personal view is that the concept of a species is a completely arbitrary construct that humans have created .
In the world of Paul 's day an ambassador was a man prepared to travel to a foreign territory to represent his kingdom bearing a message and expressing the views of those who sent him .
Such a man is a free man in Christ .
Excellence at the highest levels in an institution is a vitalising influence at all levels .
The third factor that must determine the optimal size of an institution is the availability of a suitable site for its present and foreseeable future needs .
A bonus is the situation .
That in a nutshell is the attitude of the leadership of the Intifada .
We believe that a baby is a baby from the moment it is conceived and applying an arbitrary date at which a baby gains the full protection of the law results in a matter of life or death for millions of children .
An example is the Single Regeneration Budget Challenge Fund ( SRB ) winning initiatives in Newhaven , Eastbourne and Hastings .
A drug is a drug is a drug ...
They say a week is a long time in politics , so 3 years is a very long time indeed and , especially when the economy is in the shape it is , it is irresponsible to say that the government will absolutely not consider tax rises for such a period of time .
On the other hand , a planet is an object formed in the way we believe the planets in our solar system formed , by accretion in a circumstellar disk .
F & A outsourcing is another rapidly developing sector .
Sometimes they wear hats or caps - but a titfa is no substitute for a propa characta .
Debts Solved Limited t / a X-debt are a UK debt management company providing debt advice on a number of debt solutions .
The decision as to whether a worker is an employee or self employed rests with the employer responsible for the PAYE administration .
Several conditions are applied to determine if a worker is an employee or self employed and several years after that worker joined the business that can result in serious potential tax liabilities in the future .
Cooking in a tent is a fire risk so I would rather hope that its not ... read more Symonds Yat .. have blisters on blisters ..!
Travel apps on a smartphone are the ideal way to quickly check a map , flight details or where there 's a good restaurant nearby .
A : Marianne - a worry is the impact on future employment of recorded content .
The lady selling tickets ( at least I think it was a lady ; it was n't yet midday ) told me that a redback is a spider , that West End is a beer , and that England is a country that receives a lot of rain .
Abuse is only abuse if a man is the abuser .
SSDI is an entitlement program , as is Social Security , unemployment benefits , Medicare , VA benefits , etc. , etc. , etc. Here , let 's let Wikipedia spell it out for you as it 's about as technical as you can handle : uriblank " An entitlement is a guarantee of access to benefits based on established rights or by legislation .
A vote is a vote is a vote .
Freeboard [ skateboard ] A freeboard is a kind of specialist skateboard designed to closely simulate the behavior of a snowboard .
A follower is a disciple .
A website is a house , built on that plot of land , with the various pages of a website being equivalent to the rooms of the house .
A typical magnet content posting in a newsgroup is the FAQ or frequently asked questions summary in which each question has an agreed-upon-by-the-group-experts answer .
" The question of whether a domain name infringes or dilutes a trademark is a very complicated question of law , and at this time the law is not terribly clear on the subject , " said G. Gervais Davis , an attorney who represents domain name owners .
The death of a child is a very hard issue for a lot of us in this life , so the ideal of children being raised in heaven is soothing to many .
In our society we say that a person is an adult at a specifi age and treat them as such , but in the spiritual world no such age exists .
An egg is a common object , unremarkable on the surface and containing nothing but a sort of gooey liquid .
( 1.2 ) An engineering specification of an artefact is a physical object considered by a rational agent to be a representation 2 of the artefact .
( 1.3 ) A design of an artefact is an entity by which means a rational agent considers different engineering specifications to be representations 2 of the same artefact .
A diode is a part of a power supply .
' Instead of pursuing the question of under what conditions artefacts endure in terms of time , we pursue the question of when an object is a token of a given artefact type .
A transistor is a semiconductor element that was developed as a device for amplification of electric current .
An altar and a sacrifice were the foundation .
A knight is a chevalier , a youth on a horse , which , in addition to its literal meaning in the medieval Grail sagas , also suggests , metaphorically , the soul who is a novice rider on the animal aspect of one 's nature .
A dozen is a quantity that means twelve 5 .
The " Ball Bearing Test " checking the rebound of a big [ 3 / 4 to 1 " ] ball bearing dropped from about a foot is a pretty good indicator if the anvil is hard .
In the preceding example , a product is an instance of a custom entity class named ProductEntity .
The fact that an act is an act of deceiving someone might not always mean that there is a primary reason against it , but on some occasions the fact that an act of deceiving someone is an act of causing undeserved pain ( say ) might mean that , on those occasions , there is a primary reason against it that grounds a secondary reason ( not to deceive ) .
A frame is a segment that can contain other documents ( such as full websites ) .
They 're major touchstones by which a government is both chosen and judged .
The distribution of a variable is the pattern of values .
MACROS MACRO DEFINITION A macro is a collection of printer commands , control codes and / or data created by the user that is downloaded and stored in the printer 's memory .
A millennium is a period of 1,000 years .
The way we know if an event is a miracle is by seeing if it could have been caused by natural forces .
Note that one of the biggest modern myths perportrated by a manufacture is the use of hardening salts and a gas flame for a we minutes .
Preparation Two of the biggest issues with owning a gator is the size of the enclosure , and the duration of time owners are willing to keep them .
What does it mean when a puppy is a stillborn ?
Her theme in Becoming a Subject is the nature of self , which she understands as the self-conscious , reflective , judging , reason-giving self -- ' someone who recognizes herself as an ' I ' , as having her own peculiar perspective ' ( 1 ) .
An RV is all about mobile accommodation but if you ca n't bring along your recreational equipment or vehicles , your choice of activities is limited , and that often defeats the whole purpose of going camping .
Such an position is , of course , a gigantic red herring , spawned in those misty polluted creeks where arguments get obfuscated by fiddling around with the key term ( the famous text book example of such a fallacy is the following : Nothing is better than a good lesson ; a bad lesson is better than nothing ; therefore , a bad lesson is better than a good lesson ) .
A hybrid is a combination of two or more different things , aimed in achieving a particular objective or goal .
An indicator is a measurable feature that provides useful information on ecosystem status , quality or trends and the factors that affect them .
Would we say that his inability to make an error is a negative ?
That Pete Rose is a gambler is a fact .
It is , as a result , a game in which you can get very confused , thinking that a player is a contender when he is n't and failing to spot the winner .
The central issue to address in such an essay is this : How do one or more particular features of the style of the poem contribute to the quality of the exploration of feeling which is going on in the poem ?
A covenant is a mutual agreement between 2 or more persons to do or refrain from doing certain acts .
A covenant is a contract or agreement between two parties .
Dans l ' Ancien Testament , le mot hébreu berith en est toujours ainsi tradu its.Ber ith is derived from a root which means " to cut , " and hence a covenant is a " cutting , " with reference to the cutting or dividing of animals into two parts , and the contracting parties passing between them , in making a covenant Gen. 15 ; Jer 34:18 34:18 , 19 ) .
An example is a PH batting for the pitcher the first time and fourth time ; the pitcher could bat the second at bat ; another PH could bat the third time .
Bill Stoneman 's first win as a starter is a no-hitter for Montreal at Philadelphia .
A blacksmith is a person who forges iron ( or steel ) .
Getting banded from a forum is a bunch of points .
As a subject , social drinking is a taboo , whereas social drinking as a practice is an integral part of CRC Tribal Mores .
A subnetwork is a graph that represents a subset of the nodes and edges of a larger graph .
The characteristic path length , CPL , of a graph is the average of the smallest number of edges that separate each node from every other node .
( 98 -102 ) Being and Time as a whole is a text that can never truly be " about " being , but can only be a text that evokes its " subject matter " through the metaphoric excess of its language , and , similarly , the text on conscience cannot be " about " conscience .
Factors that may inhibit increased ventilation in a house are the outdoor temperature , noise , comfort , energy costs , the condition of windows or doors , or cultural and personal habits .
You are correct : simply recording an event in a book is no proof , since lie can be written in this way .
Modern writers and movie producers , who are NOT experts in their field often state that a whitesmith was a smith who worked white metals , like tin or silver .
motor from furnace : the last motor I changed in a furnace was a 1 / 3 hp dayton that ran the large squirrelcage fan via v-belts .
A hardy is a shanked chisel and the anvil has a hardy hole for it .
My take on it would be that there most likely would be one but it 's use would be limited as a chisel is a lot cheaper and easier to make !
Moreover , obtaining a usable spectrum of a star is a time-intensive process and is prohibitively inefficient for large samples of stars .
Estimating the length of time it 's going to take to finish a project is a dark art at the best of times .
A profile is a way of defining best practices for implementing a standard or set of standards within a given community by specifying the requirements that conformant implementations must satisfy .
By most accounts a duelist with a rapier was the doom of a warrior clad in plate in one on one combat , assuming equal skill .
Fantastical Beasts / Races : If an Elephant is a problem , then a dragon is a real issue .
A crate is a valuable asset when house-training .
After all , the biggest difference between a vision and a hallucination are the number of people who can see it .
Using a scale is a great way to play -- but it is not the only way .
A clade is a monophyletic grouping of organisms .
What type of an answer is this ?
EMPLOYER / REPORTING UNIT - An employer is the legal entity subject to the Unemployment Insurance law .
But a forum is a lot different than a blog or a static website , a forum is a user-based content creation type of website so not everyone will be on board with maintaining forum SEO .
Areas An Area is a grouping of 3 to 6 Clubs , although in a 3 - Club Area there should be plans for a 4th Club .
Divisions A Division is a grouping of Areas .
Districts A District is a grouping of Divisions .
Regions A Region is a grouping of Districts .
The longer a man is a soldier the more he learns ; but the time will come , I hope , when we shall be considered perfect , and have our diplomas tendered us .
A node is a leaf when it has no children comments .
An elevator is a luxury and luxuries have no place at Ellinger 's You will be short of breath when you reach the top of the fourth flight , but in recovering , you have time to take in the surroundings - a great barn of a place with the single charm of good light .
Definition : The short definition of a Mandala is thus : A mandala is a drawing or map representing the Buddhist or Hindu universe .
A vertex is a point that forms the corner of a face or polygon .
A face is a triangular portion of a surface object .
A polygon is a quadrilateral portion of a surface object .
An edge is the boundary of a face or polygon .
The dry weight of a vehicle is the weight of the vehicle without passengers and cargo , as specified by the manufacturer .
The VV & A tool is a storage space for reviews , as well as a management tool for the workflow of the reviews associated to each CSERD material .
A masaya is a savyer .
The telegraphs and telephones were dead , and at first a war-correspondent was an outlaw .
An instrument is a developing piece of technology , and today 's technology is an outgrowth of earlier technology .
A pippin is a variety of apple , brought to this country by the early settlers to the colonies .
Usually such a change is the result of a person having to change where they post their Web site .
An example of a nickname is the surname Beal which stands for " handsome man .
Finding an identity was a crucial component of the demand for civil and economic rights .
Jesus as a lamb is a sacrifice for mankind 's sins .
Remember that a recession is the first and necessary phase of a recovery .
Minister for War Kitchener wrote to First Lord of the Admiralty Winston Churchill that the only place a diversionary attack might have an effect was the Dardanelles .
It was a scruffy win , but a win is a win at this stage of the season .
Made in 1915 , BIRTH OF A NATION was the first masterpiece of cinema , bringing to film the status accorded to the visual and performing arts .
A servlet is a Java class that can loaded into a Web server to process and answer HTTP requests .
For both black men and women , having unprotected sex with a man is the leading cause of HIV infection .
Recompiling a kernel is a complex process ( at least at first ) , and it is beyond the scope of this document .
The semantic result for an utterance is the value of the Rule Variable of the root rule when all semantic interpretation evaluations have been completed .
After all , a nurse is a professional too , and she should report such a matter to a head .
So a colony is a once-in-a-century extravagance .
And you 're going to have intrusive neighbors , life support inspectors , and administrators : a habitat is a terribly easy environment to break , and it does n't mesh well with a Wild West individualism .
A BestPractice is another name for a Pattern A WorstPractice ?
It can be said that a BestPractice is the careful application of means and methods which bring about a successful result .
-- DonaldNoyes The opposite of a BestPractice is a CodeSmell .
To dream of losing or wandering off a trail is a warning against wasting your time in meaningless activities and / or relationships .
Dreaming of driving a train is a good omen , meaning you are on the right course in your life .
Getting all the key people in the various departments to agree to acquire a book is no mean feat .
Get passed the first 30 days and you 'll find that an aquarium is an easy , beautiful addition to your house or office .
Eclipses have long played a part in understanding our atmosphere , as an eclipse is the nearest nature comes to turning off the sun .
An example is the use of car bugs , which are fitted inside classic cars to track their movement .
The most important thing about a hotel is the staff .
A hotel is an idealised environment where everything is supposed to be good .
A wildcard is a symbol that represents any character or characters in search text .
For , being on a cruise is all about taking you away from the norm and providing an environment of wonderfully stylish relaxation , be it up-tempo or laid back .
However , for the moment , a challenge is all it is .
Phase two was the period from 1825 to 1855 when the hunt was in conflict with the local landowners and as a consequence was a turbulent time with frequent changes of Mastership .
Nothing need be said about the class character of the state in general ... a majority is a majority and a minority is a minority ...
However predating these by at least a decade is the lovely Black Eyes and Lemonade poster , designed by Barbara Jones in 1951 , which was used to advertise an exhibition at London 's Whitechapel Gallery as part of the 1951 Festival of Britain .
An allophone is a sound from which all words are made .
The Bentley Slip-Not set in a box is a complete grooming set in a handy plastic case .
' And Toosey said , ' Sir , in the Territorial Army an order is a matter for discussion .
A wedding is a one off occasion which deserves a legendary send off .
Strange energy-sapping beings float around , and finding a gun is a good move - though you 'll need to collect a magazine of bullets as well before you can start blasting away .
Having problems riding a bike is an obvious sign , as well as not being able to tie shoelaces - just because you do n't seem to have problems painting and cleaning , it does n't mean you do n't have dyspraxia , as it can affect people in different ways .
A code is a contingent string , and no code must be written so as to cause harms .
• Blue on blue counts , a hit is a hit , just like in the real world .
A beautiful woman is a beautiful woman , but a beautiful woman with a brain is an absolutely lethal combination ...
There 's never been a worse time to be homeless , double whammy of Christmas AND arctic conditions 50 p or a quid is no great loss to most of us but can brighten someone else 's day a little , yes buy the food drink yourself if you think they 'll spend it on drugs , but it 's still hardly anything other than a few moments of your time .
Probably because a dog is the thing thats going to show them some warmth and love and not judge them or treat them like something on the bottom of their shoe , plus companionship / company .
GHK AKS 74 U Magazine 38 quid a pop was the 1 's i was looking at as there roughly the same as the hi-cap mags i already have so would want too stay the same but 38 quid a pop !!!
" Becoming an academy is a solution for the majority of under-performing schools , but when there is a strong desire to maintain the character of a school ... the solution could be for a company to run the school on a contracted-out basis for a number of years , " he said .
A variant is the Catalan flag in the same form but with the Reus rose , not in the center of the flag , but in the center of the rectangular part .
To send a letter is a good way to move somewhere without moving anything but your heart .
Caretaker boss Grant Brown admitted a draw was a fair result after Lincoln City were held at home by local rivals Mansfield Town .
Oh well - a draw was a fair result and I hope they can build on it and give Cambridge a bit of a scare !
" Agree a draw was a fair result .
A concert was a terrific success , he said , with a capacity audience .
A gibbet is the old type of gallows they used to leave people hanging on them till they rotted and fell off , i have been told by a Sheffield historian that the last but one in Town was outside The Rotherham House on Exchange St .
And a blank is the last thing autistic people need .
Leaving the scene of an accident is an banning offence and he clearly deserves it .
A book is a snapshot of whatever it was you felt was interesting at that moment , and it 's fixed in aspic , which can have its drawbacks .
A society is a not-for-profit organization .
The first step in incorporation of a society is the approval of the name through the Names Unit of the Corporate Registry .
We believe that receiving an education is a right of every refugee child and that it is critical for sustainable development .
And like the earlier poster , I think my lack of a television is a key element .
But , sometimes writing a dissent is a futile thing because it does n't become the law and you ca n't cite it as the binding law .
Add Category : Topic Informant Workgroup if necessary , i.e. , if an article is a biography of a living person , profile of a company , group , etc. -- essentially , any article that concerns an existing nonpolitical entity with legal interests .
Note : if an article is an " external " article and it has not been changed enough to be considered " CZ Live , " consider whether according to our deletion rules you should put the { { speedydelete } } template on the page ( put this template on the article 's talk page , please ) .
( Roughly speaking , Girard found pure systems in which one can express the sentence " a type is a type " . ) Furthermore , all known examples of pure type systems that are not strongly normalizing are not even ( weakly ) normalizing : they contain expressions that do not have normal forms , just like the untyped lambda calculus [ citation needed ] .
A volvelle is a paper disc that can revolve on another paper surface(s) .
A hornbook is a type of children 's primer from emerging in the 15th century .
Sponsored by VISA BusinessRunning a small business as an entrepreneur is a never-ending challenge of new products , customers , competitors , and an unpredictable ...
Sprouted grain / nuts can be made into bagels , cheeses , burgers , breads , but my friends think a sprout is a skinny piece of bunny food in a salad .
The two sites are powered by a single EE install using Multiple Site Manager , and because a film is a film is a film , we had a single Films channel to power both sites placed in the MBF site .
An almanac is an annual publication of facts and statistics .
An armorial is a book containing a collection of illustrations representing coat of arms or other heraldry .
A dictionary is a reference work listing words in alphabetical order .
A cookbook is a type of reference book containing a collection of recipes and instructions for preparing food .
A encyclopedia is a compendium holding a summary of information in all branches of knowledge or a specific branch such as science .
A handbook is a reference book containing factual information on a specific subject .
A manual is a book providing practical rules , steps , and instructions for performing a task or using a piece of equipment .
A textbook is a book designed specifically for use by students in learning .
A primer is a book designed for young children who are learning to read and spell .
A copybook is a textbook used to teach a specific skill .
A yearbook is an annual compendium of information related to a particular country , institution , or subject .
An essay is a short literary composition reflecting an author 's viewpoint .
Remember , the interface to a class is the set of public constructor and method signatures .
An obituary is a prime opportunity to fulfill Lord Acton 's maxim to " suffer no man and no cause to escape the undying penalty which history has the power to inflict on wrong .
Inducing hypothermia in patients who are being resuscitated after a heart attack or who have suffered a stoke is an active area of investigation .
Karl Agathon and Caprica-Valerii 's child is the first Human / Cylon hybrid conceived in love , and as a result is the first successful hybrid ; no other embryo survived nearly as long , since the embryo is approximately five weeks old ( TRS : " Six Degrees of Separation " ) .
Putting software on a computer is a trivial and expected step that should n't contribute to patentability .
A flat-B is an augmented second whose size is 3 semitones , the same size as that of a minor third .
The commercialization of water as a commodity is a bad idea , given that the world 's supply of potable water is dwindling , and there will be increased pressure to lock us into an ongoing supply of our water outside our borders .
An arch is a very significant piece of architecture to freemasons .
A dome is a symbol of either the sun or the moon depending on the circumstances .
A square is a fundamental aspect of Masonic thought , and regarded as both a right angle and a square .
A videotape is a ribbon-like , flexible strip of materials that stores magnetic signals .
A videocassette is a plastic box that holds the videotape on two reels .
If you 're looking to launch anything in the future , then definitely a blog is the best communication medium to leverage .
" If the privacy of a room was a protection , all of the youth of the city might be corrupted by taking them one by one into a chamber , and there inflaming their passions by the exhibition of lascivious pictures .
As a colony is a settlement , not actually the territory on which such settlement is built on !
Dinner and a Movie is a regular series with SFIAAFF staff members .
[N]either Robinson nor Belton requires an item be a " container " in order to be searchable upon arrest .
" His status as an outsider is a big issue and is on the line when it comes to endorsing Dole .
Even before the AIDS pandemic , the literature on child prostitution from all parts of the world repeated , without evidence , that child prostitutes were sought after because they were believed to be free of sexually transmitted diseases ( STDs ) , including the apparently worldwide belief that penetrative sex with a virgin is a cure .
Rarely will an interview be the determining factor in an application .
This tutorial explains how to obtain a substance 's the empirical formula from an elemental analysis .
The fundamental point is that a job is a job - you are either unemployed or employed .
A combination is the result of an opponent 's mistake ; it 's what happens when preparation meets opportunity .
If for obvious reason like fingers ca n't hover over an icon is a barrier than maybe at least holding the icon for a few seconds indicates to the system to show a tooltips ?
In Isaiah 65:22 65:22 , God likewise promises " They shall not build , and another inhabit ; they shall not plant , and another eat : for as the days of a tree are the days of my people , and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands .
Scientists are scrambling to find answers ; some believe a virus is the root cause , and others , including Reidenbach , attribute the losses to rising sea levels and warming seas .
A must-visit is the famous Ras Muhammad National Park , where there are more than 1,000 species of fish and 170 types of brightly coloured coral to be discovered .
They would n't let a woman be a tinker , a tailor , a soldier or a sailor , but they could n't stop her being a thief .
A dado is a groove cut across a piece of lumber , while a groove is a channel running with the grain .
However , in the USA it appears to be necessary to list every last item which could constitute printed publication or printed matter , for example , brochures , pamphlets , booklets , circulars , inserts , flyers , bills etc. I wonder if it would be possible to end up arguing over whether a pamphlet was a leaflet and vice versa when looking at questions of use in the US .
Once caught , an eel is a wriggly thing to kill , and even after death it is helpful to place the eel on newspaper to stop it moving .
An applet is a small piece of software code , which runs in the web browser .
All political issues and contexts are unique and complicated and as such making it simple to encourage users to participate in a debate is a good thing .
Faces In A Crowd is a particularly interesting example .
Being a referee is the next best thing if you love football and you 're not a very good player - at least you are getting involved in the sport and on the pitch .
Pediatrician A pediatrician is a doctor who treats children .
Nephrologist A nephrologist is a doctor who treats kidney diseases and kidney failure .
It 's been vital to educate a client that taking time out for themselves or putting aside some cash for a session is a positive thing to do .
On meeting and greeting a Pakeha for the first time , a handshake and a smile are the casual norm .
If you think around the implications of this cluster of meanings , you can see that what an audience , or a readership , expect from a hero is a very serious form of game , in which the hero is expected to struggle on two fronts , externally with an actual evil , and internally with his / her own doubts and shortcomings .
If you are new to being self employed taking on a franchise is a very good way of starting out because it is a tried and tested business opportunity .
The minterm form Known as the first canonical form , this a pure OR combination of minterms where a minterm is an AND function that includes each variable once in its normal or complemented form .
The maxterm form Known as the second canonical form , this a pure AND combination of maxterms where a maxterm is an OR function that includes each variable once in its normal or complemented form .
Where by reason of the provisions of paragraph 1 a company is a resident of both Contracting States , then if it was created under the laws in force in a Contracting State , it shall be deemed to be a resident of that State .
Where an individual was a resident of the United States immediately before the individual 's death , for the purposes of subsection 70 ( 6 ) of the Income Tax Act , both the individual and the individual 's spouse shall be deemed to have been resident in Canada immediately before the individual 's death .
A : If you do n't start from reality , if you do n't start from the fact that a film is a film , then you are not going to produce any positive effects by the diffusion of your film in the social structure .
In a film , politics expresses itself in aesthetics , because a film is a matter of transforming a certain content into a certain form .
A film is the telling .
A laptop is the most flexible learning tool .
An aerosol is a colloid suspension of fine solid particles or liquid droplets in a gas .
The New Science of Building Great Teams By Alexander Pentland April 2012 Harvard Business Review uriblank The most important predictor of success in a group is the amount - not the content - of social interaction .
One of the issues that occassionally comes up when I am designing a Knowledge Cafe for an organisation is the fear that people will use it as an opportunity to dissent about some issue .
Inside or not , hack or not hack , a crime is a crime .
What is a conspiracy is the industry led denial of climate science uriblank and one has to wonder if anyone involved in it was responsible for the suspiciously timed , hacked emails .
A gigaton is a billion ( 109 ) metric tons , 1012 kg , or about 2200 billion pounds .
An object is a combination of state and behavior .
A cluster is a conglomeration of stars that all formed pretty much at the same time .
A paradigm is a system of thought or ideas based on observations , hypotheses and theories .
Seriously , I do n't understand why a furlough is a short-term solution but layoffs are a long-term solution .
Did you know a convention is a big meeting , and delegates are people appointed to represent a group ?
Did you know a compromise is an agreement ?
Did you know a term is the length of time in office ?
An ambassador is a representative from a foreign country .
Did you know an ambassador is a representative from a foreign country ?
The accepted definition of a commission is a group nominated by some higher authority to perform a specific function .
In terms of the wavefunction , a world is a decohered branch of the universal wavefunction , which represents a single macrostate .
A measurement is an interaction , usually irreversible , between subsystems that correlates the value of a quantity in one subsystem with the value of a quantity in the other subsystem .
An example of a retrodiction is the perihelion shift of Mercury which Newtonian mechanics plus gravity was unable , totally , to account for whilst Einstein 's general relativity made short work of it .
Let 's not even talk about the sidewalks , where most of the concrete stills bears the imprint of having been poured 90 years ago -- and it shows because just walking a block is an adventure .
A cookie is a small text file that is stored on your computer 's hard drive or stored temporarily in your computer 's memory .
An author is the one responsible for the manuscript that reaches an editor 's desk , and it 's vital that the words the editor reads are the author 's , and not those of a well-meaning but misguided critiquer .
For the homeowner who wants full control but does n't want to build their own home - they 're not lunatics - then a prefab is a good way to start .
A mutualism is a relationship in which both partners benefit by their association .
Having a hundred million dollars of inventory laying around for a month is an expensive business .
In the Senate , a filibuster is an attempt to extend debate on a proposal in order to delay or completely prevent a vote on its passage .
" Challenged by an anarchist , one is always sensitive for the honor of legally constituted society , and I replied that of course the men could have an attorney , that the assassin himself would eventually be furnished with one , that the fact that a man was an anarchist had nothing to do with his rights before the law !
" A class is an offering of a course to one or more students .
General Lifespan 1745 - Present Definition / History , etc. A symphony is any piece of music played by an orchestra - usually in several movements .
A movement is a complete section of music ( usually all one overall speed and style ) that you DON ' T clap after .
An orchestra is a group of musicians - frequently in tuxes and black dresses who play a variety of instruments .
Remember A symphony is any piece of music played by an orchestra - usually in several movements .
A song is a very specific kind of music .
A logo is an icon , a picture , a ' bug ' that communicates the image ( and hopefully the name ) of the company without any additional words .
Taking a picture is an ideal way to document the information on the stone without causing deterioration .
As if a woman were a mere coloured superficies !
I believe that a poem is an emotional-intellectual-physical construct that is meant to touch the heart of the reader , that it is meant to be reexperienced by the reader .
I believe that a poem is a window that hangs between two or more human beings who otherwise live in darkened rooms .
I also believe that a poem is a noise and that noise is shaped .
A tie is a sister-kiss , perhaps , but in this case a sweet one .
A radio commercial recently described an automobile as " the second largest investment of a lifetime " - implying that ( 1 ) a car is an investment , not a consumer purchase , and ( 2 ) the only thing more expensive that people ever purchase is a home .
A bird is a bird , and nothing more .
The object of a trial is the administration of justice in a course as free from doubt or chance of miscarriage as merely human administration of it can be - not the interests of either party .
Teaching one student at a time is a great opportunity to help each student develop his / her speaking and presentation skills if that is what the student requires from you .
A thing to bear in mind is that an alternator is a rotary machine and there are limits on the voltage side .
Unless that is done article 3 ( 2 ) ( a ) will enable the main purpose of the scheme to be frustrated by endless formalistic arguments as to whether a provision is a definitional or an exclusionary provision .
A hoax is a message , typically distributed via e-mail or newsgroups , that is written to deliberately spread fear , uncertainty and doubt .
At one level , this reflects the British constitutional theory that a dissolution is the prerogative of the Sovereign .
A callsign is a mixture of letters and numbers from 3 characters long .
A recession is the down side of the business cycle .
Some of the rooms as is typical in a city are a bit on the small side , but decoration is fab , I love proper curtains and attention to detail and they have done a great job here .
i was made redundant 18 months ago and finding a job was a job in itself .
A stray arm waving a drumstick was all most saw of Mr .
The only smoker who gives me a laugh is a woman who works for a Give Up Smoking charity in Barnsley who 's always standing outside having a cig .
During Mexico 's crisis year while all around him were losing their heads , Slim kept his and stuck to his maxim that buying in a panic is a good idea .
A gennal is a passage .
In my day , a gennel was a covered alleyway between two terraced houses .
A wormhole is a theoretical ' tunnel ' or shortcut , predicted by Einstein 's theory of relativity , that links two places in space-time - visualised above as the contours of a 3 - D map , where negative energy pulls space and time into the mouth of a tunnel , emerging in another universe .
Vicky added : " I think getting a tattoo is a brilliant idea although I am glad it is not me having it done .
a bicycle is a vehicle and its use on the public road has to be controlled like any other vehicle .
" - a pothole is a pothole , it is not for riding through fast OR slow on a road bike .
" If you ca n't see my mirrors , I ca n't see you " Sure they 're a little tame but they have truth in them , do you think a bus is any different ?
Has Amazon considered that the best thing for presenting the media in a book is a book ?
:D Also worth a mention is the KPC takeaway at Hackenthorpe .
When brake fluid looks from colorless up to yellow , particular attention is required since in such a case the risk of making a mistake is the highest .
The Gregg Diet - Eat a Lot is a follow up article to The Gregg Diet - It 's the Rub , an article written by this author about six months ago .
A brush is a brush to Eva even after a year of being here , its one of her lasting phobias along with the bath , I need some one to hold her and talk to her while I do the deed as she is just too big for me to hold and brush or bath .
Those that have them are feeding back good vibes on this weapon , and an owner is the best person to give an opinion .
Learning or Earning .. how tough a decision is that :rolleyes: More learning is just putting off the day you start earning .
The active ingredient that makes Agel FIT such a success is a patent pending ingredient called CitriMax ™ .
Really letting these people anywhere near a park is a bad idea as it will only lead to more trouble eventually .
Please do n't discount the poll - it 's an insult to all those that voted - positive or negative 14 people with no issues proves that almost half of the forum members have no issues which is higher than I thought it would be , so the argument that peeple only look at forums when they have a problem is a wasteful one .
Before celebrating Burns Night , Salmond quoted the Bard 's poem A Man 's A Man For A ' That to back his case - suggesting that London lords were trying to dictate to Scotland .
' For us to see our grandchild for the first time in a mortuary was the most heartbreaking thing we have ever had to do .
Get a life , get real ; a job is a job , as long as it pays , it ca n't be called ' crap ' .
The feeder that looked like an acorn was a really attractive product and one that I would be more than happy to have in my garden ... price allowing of course .
A week is a long time in politics .
holidays with friends , golf , and having a baby are the three things that Daniel and Lucy have always sworn they will never do in life .
A win is a win and i 'm happy to to see Barca get knocked off there perch , even though I think they 'll get the result at the Nou camp .
Or variants thereof , such as , " If a week is a long time in politics then a month seems an eternity .
A highlight is the beautiful tropical garden .
The test for allowing an amendment is the " relative injustice and hardship " involved .
Fees for a pitch were a bit more than expected , about 30 % more than I 've paid all summer .
" The recognition that what I believe in is also worthy of an award is a great feeling .
How on earth the American President giving a speech is the " defining moments in WORLD history " ?
Finally worth a note is a price that is available only on the exchanges , and that concerns this game being a high scoring encounter .
CA : Do you think charging ' from £ 85 ' to be entered for an award is the right way to go ?
One of the people he made into a star was the Island vet , Heike Dorn .
Therefore an agent is accountable to the principal Fiduciary responsibility an agent is a trustee of the principal and therefore 1 .
yes it does an leh is a let just with stronger internals And different wiring .
David added : " Although a newspaper is a business , it has a community dimension and responsibility which makes it very different .
And a delusion is a delusion whether one or twelve or twelve billion people believe it .
The site is very picturesque and a bonus was the great weather we had , this though meant that the midges were biting .
As do psu 's - a teddycap was a big help .
In a seminar I attended , he gave the following hypothetical example : Let us say that a husband is a member of an expedition to the North Pole , and his wife is a surgeon back home .
[ / b ] [ / i ] For Pompanazzi , a miracle is the effect of some natural cause which may in future be discovered , although as yet we do not know the material reason .
" The suggestion that there ' might be strands of the medieval village that could be incorporated into the proposal ' tells me that what we 're going to end up with is a room is the Ducal Mansion filled with papier mache life-size models of medieval houses and market stalls , brought to life through an ' audio tour ' .
I must say that the bad bits are ' personal ' as the car as a whole was a great package , fun to drive ( even if EVO only gave it 3 stars ) and the brakes were the most impressive bit ( much better than I thought they would be ) , but for me the ' go ' did n't seem to match the ' stop ' .
Although a teardrop is the most aerodynamic shape in nature , the most aerodynamic production car was the Vauxhall Calibra with a drag factor of 0.26 ;) I do beleive the current model Honda Accord has a cd of 0.26 and currently the world 's lowest drag coefficient for a production road car is the Honda Insight , which achieves a Cd of 0.25 ;) But im not picky !
Most common reason for Back Pain with a fever is the common FLU .
its because the police are too scared to clamp down - and scared of being accused " racist " ... if I wasnt mistaken A LAW IS A LAW is this country and should be adhered to my ALL members of our wonderful multicultral society !!!
Having changed the top picture to a collage is a lot better than it was !
Maturity [ geology ] In petroleum geology , the maturity of a rock is a measure of its state in terms of hydrocarbon generation .
With the exception of jobs that require specific under or post graduate qualifications ( ie ; doctors , engineers etc ) , to most recruiters a degree is a degree .
Inverness CT playing St Johnstone 4 times a season is a joke , and the main reason why Scottish football is now officiallly a minnow .
In 1999 , Pixar animator Victor Navoneused this song to create an alien music video which for a time was a minor Internet phenomenon .
The movement in circles of the crowd bearing their banners around a leader is an image which is the same as the circulation of the blood around the heart .
If you construed that as me thinking that you buying a jacket is a joke then I apologise .
Portico A portico is a porch on the front of a house which has at least one side made by pillars or columns which also support the roof .
Portico In architecture a portico is a colonnade or covered ambulatory , especially in classical styles of architecture .
Portico [ disambiguation ] A portico is a porch leading to the entrance of a building with a roof structure over a walkway .
Dressing to go an event is one } Wolf costume for sale { thing nevertheless having to imitate and dress up as someone else or perhaps an object is an additional matter .
We 're all afraid of being alone , but perhaps the thing you fear the most-not having a boyfriend-may be the very thing that will give you the independence you need in order to find real love .
Often you will appreciate that a carrier is a great idea because of this kind of advertising .
Being a stylist is a hard job !
Election as a Fellow is an honor bestowed upon AAAS members by their peers ; UCSB 's six new Fellows are among a total of 486 named nationwide .
We all know selecting a college is a tough choice .
a dog is a very important thing that they consider .
Possession of a copy is a grave offense , but the Ministry seems to be powerless to stop its spread .
Teaching the next generation to be safe , legal and confident on a bike is a lot of fun , but there 's a lot of behind-the-scenes work that goes into making it happen .
The conversations involved the defendant luring , tempting , or inviting sexual interaction with individuals who were or whom he believed to be " under age , " conduct that could constitute enticement of a child were an interlocutor under the age of sixteen .
The twirl of her stool , what a stroke was that !
Since when has a guess by a think-tank been the same thing as ' government policy ' ?
In life generally one could say that the most basic actions give rise to bad use of the body - sitting down in a chair is a classic example .
Three lessons a week is the ideal , though you do n't often persuade people to come that often !
Absolutely need it to fit in a pocket ; an iPad is a purse not a wallet .
A second is the alternative : a kind of " truth and reconciliation tribunal " where confession and evidence can be tendered without prosecution , but perhaps with minimal appropriate penalties - a version of which was used to get the testimonial evidence against Lance Armstrong .
An avatar is a digital , animated representation of yourself in Second Life .
It might seem , in fact , that such a consequence is a small price to pay for the power of a naturalized model of biological function , and rendering function in terms of biological evolution certainly has the prima facie look of a successful naturalization .
A crucial issue for a composite is the relationship between ACRIM 1 and ACRIM 2 results across the two year gap between them .
They 've been doing this for years , so they give scores that are so accurate that they 're actually better predictors of survival time than whether a tribute is a volunteer , a Career , male or female , or forms an alliance .
If you 're experiencing stress and anxiety levels that feel unmanageable , you might want to talk to a professional-there 's a lot that can be done to help .
An acorn was the symbol Thomas chose for his favored XIV Corps .
The Committee recalls that an author of a communication is a victim within the meaning of article 1 of the Optional Protocol , if he / she is personally adversely affected by an act or omission of the State party .
- That American Soldiers are getting killed by young men who would be willing to lay down their arms for $ 5 a day is a travesty .
" I feel bad , you know , because a pornographer is a pornographer .
( An example is the 2010 study by America 's Health Insurance Plans Center for Policy and Research 6 ) The discharge data are collected by states directly or in cooperation with the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality ( the agency is the source of most of the data used in the industry readmission studies 7 ) .
So the only thing I would think to wrap in a tortilla is a burrito .
A non-NPS site that is also worthy of a look is the recently reopened Boston Tea Party Ships and Museum have original tea chests from the revolutionary event .
An appendectomy is a common procedure where surgeons remove an inflamed appendix .
Perhaps the greatest measure of a man is the way he takes care of his domestic responsibilities , and while Obama may have impressed many outside the US with his savoir faire and ability to read a teleprompter , his popularity in America has reached its lowest point yet , according to the latest Rasmussen Daily Presidential Tracking poll .
but that does not automatically mean a draft is the answer .
just because a draft is the only solution that you can think of , that does not make it the winning choice .
what you are advocating in a draft is the creation of a military dependancy .
And if you do n't see that Israel is the one with the biggest guns and uses these guns in the decision on how the land is divided , I guess a discussion is a waste of time .
A degree is no magical elixir to assure a smart applicant .
A theme is a recurring pattern in literature .
A motif is a striking or unusual narrative element recurring from story to story .
DefaultPermissionGroupProvider does n't really return the permission groups of which a user is a member ; it only handles the " anonymous " and " authenticated " groups .
A sentence is a procedure to build , modify , extend a mental model .
According to his findings , a dream is the vehicle employed by an organism to cancel or archive the day 's experiences on the basis of a genetic program .
Perceptual procedures through which objects are categorized are not part of the categories : an animal is a skunk if its mother is a skunk regardless of what it looks like .
An interpretation of an utterance is any of the senses of that utterance .
An organism is a hierarchy of self-regulating holons ( a " holarchy " ) that work in coordination with their environment .
Alternatively , a fuzzy set 's entropy can be defined as a measure of how a set is a subset of itself .
For example , relative frequency is a measure of how a set is a subset of another set .
An emotion is a process in four stages : anticipation , provocation , unfolding , outcome .
A proposition is a function from possible worlds to truth-values .
An ecosystem is a system controlled by the second law of thermo - dynamics .
Martin James : A COMPUTATIONAL MODEL OF METAPHOR INTERPRETATION ( Academic Press , 1990 ) Martin does not believe that the process of comprehending a metaphor is a process of reasoning by analogy .
The specification of a program is a type definition and the program itself can be derived formally as a proof .
" A symbol is the stimulus whose response is given in advance " .
The meaning of a sentence is the way of verifying it .
A frame is the description of a category by means of a prototypi - cal member ( i.e. , its properties ) and a list of actions that can be performed on any member of the category .
A caldera is the name for the crater that develops when an underground lava pool empties , causing the ground above to collapse .
All manufacturers need to roll out a product is a proven market to sell to .
Q. How much of an influence was the late Anthony Minghella on you ?
Although I did n't take one , a buggy is a sensible option for those who do n't relish climbing the several stiffish ascents that punctuate this gorgeous course .
Sitting in a café is an art .
I remember the days when 1 a week was an amazing achievement .
Maclaurin also showed that a spheroid was a possible form of equilibrium of a mass of homogeneous liquid rotating about an axis passing through its centre of mass .
The fifth condition also appears to state that if a person is a risk to others , he or she cannot be treated without using compulsory powers , even if he or she is willing to consent .
A lady on a bridge is a wealthy person .
A transfer is a block transfer if it involves the transfer in a single transaction of all the sums and assets representing accrued rights under the scheme from which the transfer is made which relate to the member and at least one other member of that pension scheme .
4.4 Being a migrant or being the child of a migrant is a significant risk factor for psychosis .
" Two Peas and a Pod is a great store , you can get everything you need there .
And who says being a writer is all work and no play ?
Furthermore , surviving a stroke is the commonest cause of severe disability in the UK .
The camera obscura is a machine for producing a very specific kind of image , and a fetish is a particular sort of image - not , however , the kind we see in the camera obscura .
Being prepared For canny businesses , a recession is an opportunity to redefine their sector and their position in it .
A lady is both beautiful and discreet , cultured and intelligent .
A catalyst is a substance that modifies ( i.e. changes ) and increases or speeds up the rate of a reaction without being consumed in the process .
But bear in mind that away from the centre , the dog that refused to give chase to a cat is the same one who will often delight in doing just that .
Then he prayed Asr when the shadow of a man was the length of a sandal-strap plus his height .
The average pay of a soldier was a mere $ 16 a month , but today you 'll have to pay nearly this much for the privilege of doing the same .
A blog is a personal thing , as is an editorial column , or opinion-piece .
He also has epilepsy which for me is the hardest part of his whole situation - watching my baby have a fit is the most devastating thing I have ever seen .
Yet this does not mean to say that such a balance is the best of all possible worlds .
For the freedom of the one gender effectively entails - despite parallel rhetoric in relation to psyche ( male ) or soma ( female ) - the binding , or enslavement , of the other gender , and one cannot as an individual be both psychically free and somatically free or , conversely , somatically free and psychically free at the same time .
In West African tradition , a griot is a member of a caste who maintains an oral record of tribal history in the form of music , poetry and storytelling .
You may want to pretend that a tree is the judge .
A cookie is a small file which asks permission to be placed on your computer 's hard drive .
I think I have heard the analogy somewhere that the relationship one has with a cockatoo is a lot like marriage .
A cystectomy is a surgical procedure in which the bladder is removed for a variety of reasons .
A cystectomy is a complex surgical procedure which can carry up to a 25 % complication rate .
There are hundreds of thousands of workers in New Jersey who are struggling with the minimum wage , and lets be clear , $ 7.25 an hour is a poverty wage .
If such a sauropod was a land-based creature , it must have relatively continuously held its head above the ground .
Stu was not a natural musician but being in a group was the thing to do and thousands of teenagers across Liverpool were buying guitars .
If you want to get to Nightcliff or Casuarina Beach , a bicycle is a good way to go .
A TURBT is a procedure in which bladder tumors can be removed from the bladder wall .
A landlord 's compliance with the requirement to register a deposit is an important one and failure to register can have serious financial consequences .
A grommet is a small tube , usually made from Teflon which is inserted into the ear drum to help relieve pressure upon it .
A walk is a triple .
Despite seeing a 50 year record of global atmospheric CO 2 rising every year since 1957 , and global air temperatures of the last dozen years in a row being the warmest in a millennium , they dismiss these trends as natural variability .
A bursary is a payment you do n't have to pay back which we offer to help you out if you have trouble paying for study and living expenses while you 're at uni .
A department is the academic unit which is responsible for teaching and examining a unit of study .
A minor is a defined program of study , generally comprising units of study from later stages of the award course and requiring a smaller number of credit points than a major .
A prerequisite is a unit of study that needs to be completed before another unit can be attempted .
A semester is the academic teaching period of about 14 weeks in duration .
A session is a defined teaching period .
A definition is an account of what death is ; when , and only when its definition is met , death has necessarily occurred .
A link is defined as a connecting structure and a linkage is a system of links .
The field-to-table story of today 's vegetables is a story of big business , and it is sometimes because of the needs of commerce that a fruit is a vegetable , or a vegetable is treated as a fruit .
The back end of a horse is the second most important part of the fox trot .
Scientists know that a tornado is a large vortex in the atmosphere , similar to the swirling fluid flow you see in the bathtub after you pull the plug .
A proverb is a pithy sentence , concisely expressing some well-established truth susceptible of various illustrations and applications .
Another part of a seed is the seed coat that surrounds and protects each seed .
A backplane is a printed circuit board in an electronics device with sockets into which other circuit boards can be plugged .
A chatterbot is a software program that runs in a chat room or on a Web page and is designed to simulate a human conversant .
Buying or selling a home is a major step , and professional real estate agents are totally committed to helping you understand the process thoroughly so that you can make informed decisions .
The work of God in a man is the man .
A " scientific treatment " of a subject is no guarantee for its " historical basis " ; and with such scarcity of data on hand , no philologist , even among the most eminent , is justified in giving out his own conclusions for historical facts .
A fever is an early and important warning sign of infection .
Chen 's statement , a mastectomy is the accepted treatment for a second cancer because whole breast radiation , which typically accompanies a lumpectomy , is not usually recommended twice in a woman 's lifetime .
" Even now , the question of who is a Jew is a hot topic in the Jewish community , " she said .
Essentially , a terrarium is a contained system , much like an aquarium , except without all the water .
To present the gospel in the form of a command is an act of favor , because it engages the will and the affections of men , and puts it in their power to have an assurance of their salvation from which they would be necessarily excluded if no such act of obedience were enjoyed .
Deciding how to properly support a claim is the process of deciding what kind of justification to choose , and deciding how much of it is needed .
Also playing a role is the expectation that Rio will have nearly 10,000 more hotel rooms in 2016 , according to the Brazilian Hotel Industry Association .
An iamb is a metrical foot consisting of two syllables , the first syllable accented , the second accented , as in AB-AB-AB .
An anapest is a metrical foot consisting of three syllables , the first two syllables unaccented , the third accented , as in ABC-DEF-GHI-JKL .
It would not be possible to communicate unless a word was both inclusive and exclusive .
A save is a statistic credited to a relief pitcher , as set forth in this Rule 10.19 .
Coming to this three years too late , but " ragman 's roll " - if a ragman was a sort of ragpicker , would n't his " roll " be a cloth bundle with random pieces of junk inside ?
A compromise is a solution .
However , one item ( i.e. , " The more disabled a person is the lower his / her sex drive " ) was actually answered incorrectly significantly more at post-test by the support persons .
A resurrection is a new birth .
As soon can a person be a citizen before he is born , or have the immunities of an American citizen while an alien ; as one enjoy the privileges of a son of God before he is born again .
" Sexual abuse of a minor is a sin and a crime and no organization can become complacent about addressing it , " said Sr Walsh .
" Read the full text of Sister Mary Ann Walsh 's latest blog : The United Nations : Caring for Children or Caring for Culture Warriors By Sister Mary Ann Walsh Sexual abuse of a minor is a sin and a crime and no organization can become complacent about addressing it .
We have to keep in mind that , we have to continue to combat this tragedy knowing that even a case of abuse of a child is a case too much .
We have to keep in mind that we have to continue to combat this tragedy knowing that even a [ single ] case of abuse of a child is a case too much .
A cookie is a small amount of data , which often includes a unique identifier that is sent to your computer , tablet or mobile phone ( referred to here as a " device " ) browser from a website 's computer and is stored on your device 's hard drive .
Within its frame of reference , which is the only way it should be judged , a classic is a piece of writing that exhausts the possibilities of its form .
Any parent knows a toddler is a natural perpetual motion machine but what counts as actual exercise for a toddler ?
But to be in a place is an accident of a body ; hence " where " is numbered among the nine kinds of accidents .
But to be in a place is an accident when compared with the extrinsic container .
Vitamin A deficiency is a common problem in poor countries .
A gene is a section of a DNA molecule that specifies the production of a particular protein .
An index is a detailed topic analysis of the text .
A schooner is a large tumbler or drinking glass holding about 400 milliliters or 13.5 U.S. fluid ounces .
A second-day-foot is the volume of water accumulated in one day by a flow of one cubic foot per second ; this is equal to exactly 86 400 cubic feet or about 2446.58 cubic meters .
A shaftment is the distance from the tip of the outstretched thumb to the opposite side of the palm of the hand .
The most important property of a conductor is the amount of current it will carry when a voltage is applied .
In retail trade , a skein is a highly variable unit , varying from one type of yarn to another and often from one manufacturer to another .
In the 1600 's a slug was a roughly shaped lump of metal shot from a primitive cannon .
Until recently , no one thought a smidgen was an actual unit of measure , but recently kitchen supply stores in the U.S. and other countries have begun selling sets of " minispoons " in which the smallest spoon , labeled " smidgen , " is designed to hold exactly 1 / 2 pinch or 1 / 32 teaspoon , which is roughly 0.005 fluid ounce or 0.15 milliliter .
For example , a foursome is a group of four .
Such a declaration is the key which unlocks the door to the establishment of Martial Law and the suspension certain freedoms otherwise ...
An example is the fungicide prochloraz which is widely used in agriculture and gardening .
A bow ' r within a garden was the spot , Which , for their private meeting , they had got .
Whence this conclusion must directly spring : To be a cuckold is a useful thing .
These reasons make me to my thesis cling , -- To be a cuckold is a useful thing .
You need to change the boot order in the BIOS so that Boot from a CD is the first option .
He said : " Being a councillor is an incredibly rewarding job .
Whether the Blackburn Rovers Supporters Investment Trust will ever be able to raise the sort of money it would take to buy a football club is unknown , but to receive over £ 1 million of pledges in a month is no mean feat .
" To win it as part of a team is a totally different feeling than when you do it individually , " said Hoy , who won gold in the one kilometre time trial in Athens four years ago .
Nevertheless , a draw was a commendable achievement .
Are you satisfied that such a system is the best possible way to deliver quality performance , on which you obviously advise the Government ?
DC : A playwright named Itamar Moses told me this : a genius is the person who places himself in the path of the highest number of fortuitous accidents .
And yes , while attempting to big-fish-little-fish while sober as a judge is a strange way to spend your gym session - it certainly got me energised .
I love Blackburn Rovers as we all do but i think a strike is the best option .
And anybody who thinks a chicken is less sentient than a bear is a fool ...
Surface In mathematics , specifically in topology , a surface is a two-dimensional topological manifold .
A grape is the fruit that grows on the perennial and deciduous woody vines of the genus Vitis .
A raisin is any dried grape .
A currant is a dried Zante grape , the name being a corruption of the French raisin de Corinthe ( Corinth grape ) .
Since buying a house is all about bringing together interlocking elements and agreements , the last thing anyone involved wants is extra complications .
Michael Gerrard : In the past 10 years of public procurement in this country , the one aspect that I would describe as a revolution is the translation from an input-based to an output-based procurement philosophy , which Mr Maroudas touched on .
The first step you have already done , and telling someone that you have an issue is a big hurdle to cross .
An autoresponder is a sequence of email marketing messages that gets sent to subscribers in the order and frequency that you decide .
Premiums A premium is the monthly fee that is paid to an insurance company or health plan to provide health coverage , including paying for health-related services such as doctor visits , hospitalizations , and medications .
Deductible : A deductible is the amount you must pay out-of-pocket each year for health-related expenses before your insurance policy begins to pay .
Copayment : A copayment is a flat fee , or set amount that you may have to pay for a specific health-related service .
The small unit of microcontent in a presentation is an individual slide and we worked hard to isolate it .
Very importantly to physics , this experiment also showed that a photon is a " quantum " of light , sort of like a penny is the quantum of money ... it 's the fundamental indivisible unit and you ca n't have fractions .
A fresh wallpaper on an accent wall or in an entryway is a great way to add a burst of spring .
A backlash is a defensive , often unconscious response by dominant interests to threats against their power .
i use crushed fennel seeds and i think that half a teaspoon is a bit much .
The kind of times that a sixpack of longnecks and a porch are the only other ingredients to learn and laugh from .
We all know what wrinkles are but in technical and definitive terms , a wrinkle is a disorder of the skin that occurs when that particular area of the skin would have diminished strength and causing it to crumple together thus creating fine lines or wrinkles .
A man is a man and only he can determine where he wants to go and wants to do with his life ... his heart ... his mind and his journey .
The ones that will make a difference are those whose purpose is bigger than themselves .
" Hello fatass , beaten to a pulp 's a good look for you " Kyle taunted , standing up straight and pulling his club away .
The first time you perform a euthanasia is an unusual experience , and you 're bound to over think every little thing you do .
A chink is a dent .
An elephant is a big , lumbering , heavy animal .
A laptop is a big investment upfront to enter a mostly free world .
A smartphone is a tiny investment upfront to enter an expensive , yet very much accepted world .
A laptop is an all-you-can-eat experience , including an all-you-can-eat fixed internet connection .
A smartphone is an " a la carte " experience in which every component is paid for and dearly , including data packages .
And Everyone else who says their a cosplayer is a cosplayer .
A partridge is a medium-sized bird in the pheasant family .
The baby boom placed in high demand goods and services associated with the boom , with the purchase of a home being the largest expenditure .
' Compared to reading a book , watching a movie is a very passive action where one is simply processing the visual information that is being given to him .
Writers could also formulate depictions of characters with false stereotypes , but filmmakers linking an entirely visual image to an idea is an act which I think should require more caution .
According to the Israelis who railed against Gordon , the imposition of a boycott is a legitimate , perhaps even effective , means of punishment that can be invoked against our enemies , real or imagined .
Is Stavros saying that a racist is an irrational person , someone worthy of scorn ?
Upon reflection , I would clarify and say that the distinction I ( arbitrarily and unprofessionally ) make between an actor and a performer is the excessive , non-human protrusion of a single-characteristic like Van Damme , or Gaga .
We could say that the most important element in the determination of the primary motivation of a native is the element of the rising sign !
How fucking hard is it to let the first item of data in a savefile be an auto-number ..?
Going back to my original query , it seems that collecting bits of paper attesting to your ability not to be a liability is the best course of action towards acquiring a firearm .
When the night is thick and the tracks are blind A friend at a pinch is a friend , indeed , But a fool to wait for the laggard behind .
For Mike Powell , it 's a miracle he went from being musically inept to being inspired to write over 300 songs and , if the songs he performs to a backing-track were half as good as a bad Beatles record , his story might be somewhat impressive .
A second was the proposal that the end date of the True Long Count is October 28 , 2011 .
The rub being that the person carrying out the inspection probably has no idea about the sporting use of firearms , ballistics etc. What makes it a farce is the fact that I ( or you ? ) or anyone else with an open FAC can shoot any calibre firearm they possess there !
A business is a business : it must make money .
... the revenue form for authorising an agent is the 64 -8 ( available @ uriblank ) ... and it says " Once we have received your authority we will start sending letters and forms to your agent " ... which obviously as a rep you would n't routinely want ...
Being nosy I phoned the number given to ask what an agent is etc. I was told an agent is an accountant / solicitor etc - basically anyone who gets paid for dealing with a client 's TC claim .
The accompanying tomato sauce for the meatballs was a fine balance between warming spices and rich tomato , although a side is a must if ordering this dish , as we discovered .
A view is a virtual table consisting of a stored query , it contains no data .
Checking the status of a transaction is an expensive operation that may require access ( and pinging ) to the related undo segment header and undo data blocks as well .
Others had their permits voided and were left unable to legally drive their autorickshaws : selling them to a financier was the only option .
A ring is a privilege level - zero being the most privileged , and three being the least .
If you want to grow exotic new plants like dwarf korean lilac every season , a greenhouse is the perfect way to do this without spending a lot .
It looks like the full identity of a class is the package name plus the class name PLUS the application domain instance ( which I guess is created dynamically when a module or application is being loaded ) .
Perhaps such a fascination is the legacy of a South Yorkshire background , an industrial legacy built on coal and iron , mines and foundries and one that was very visible and tangible in both of our formative years .
sometimes in ejecting the round it would get lost in the sand and we would be scrabbling about in the sand to recover it as to return minus a round was a chargeable offence The other fun thing was our orders as to when we could defend ourselves , we were issued with a small eight or was it ten page red instruction manual of when we could fire and what to aim for .
It 's the micronutrient that is an ion-that is a transition element , or that element that is really critical for a particular enzyme function .
A conspiracy is an agreement to do an unlawful act or to do a lawful act by unlawful means .
A supplier is an A / P and credit card account is a bank account .
A cabal was a secret conspiracy , but the ministry was more open .
£ 100.00 Bargain deal : Flying a microlight is an exhilarating experience - and one which needs strong nerves and a real head for heights !
For existing board members an induction is a way of identifying the needs of a new trustee and finding ways to support them .
I Have set up and Run PMO 's and I have worked as a project manager and I think the biggest reason for PMO 's being viewed as an overhead is the remit that some companies give the PMO .
The industry as a whole is a good one and helps everyone involved .
A stoma is a surgical opening on the abdomen through which faeces ( colostomy and ileostomy ) or urine ( urostomy ) is emptied into a bag for disposal .
Brisk walking about three times a week is a cheap , easy and great way to start exercising .
How about An ant is a jazz note On his furrowed face , improvising .
An example is the Fire and Rescue service where vacancies have been held to allow for the redeployment of firefighters , and minimise the need for redundancies .
It 's just that to me , a throng is a crowd that one bustles through , not an expectant , sitting audience .
But it is tender , sweet , unbelievably charming and the fact it 's all very innocent actually makes it surprisingly enjoyable , it just lacks that emotional , hard hitting grittiness which I have come to expect when I see that a movie is an adaptation of a Nicholas Sparks novel .
But I do have a problem with a woman being the instituted president of the eucharistic ccmmunity .
This request , however , for a king was a sign of rebellion against God .
A granuloma is a collection of WBC 's ( mononuclear cells and macrophages ) , surrounded by lymphocytes , plasma cells , mast cells , fibroblasts , and collagen .
A virus is a piece of malicious program code designed to disrupt or damage computer systems by adding itself ( or a variant of itself ) to commonly used system or program files .
A worm is a sophisticated piece of replicating code that requires no user interaction ( such as opening an email or running a program ) to spread .
To be married to an unbeliever is no ground in and of itself why divorce should be sought .
The only one that was a countryman was the band leader .
But it has spoiled many a good keelie - a keelie is a get-together .
Another benefit to the CIPP providing a helpline is the data and feedback that it would get from other members .
A chalice is a cup or bowl , ch means i am , if you think of the word church it changes before our eyes , when we view its meaning iam ure-use practice or operations , in latin opera is work and service , ch I am , with clever word smithing it points towards , Iam ur Iam = " We are the " Church " !
Such a decree is an unprecedented step towards bringing the Vatican and the Empire closer together , but not everyone wants that .
Having a piper is a highly visible and unique addition to your function , for instance , a piper can play as a presentation party goes into the function room and be available to play later on during the function .
a person pushing a bike is a pedestrian .
Letherhead Parish Magazine November 1905 In Memoriam - George Brown On Wednesday , October 25th, there passed away from us one who has for more than half a century been a well-known and a strong personality in the Parish .
Likewise , a work colleague who was working on a project with me now loves to drink real ales although I do n't think I 've convinced any of them that writing down all your beers in a book is a worthwhile thing to do .
Watching a movie is a very special thing .
" I kept fighting , got it around and finishing with a birdie is a bonus .
The pope has stated catergorically that using a condom is a sin .
Being hit by a car is a leading cause of death in childhood .
I also dress for the occasion , dressed in a suit is the only way to do a wedding !
Reading a crowd is a difficult thing and takes lots of practice and many years of experience !
A watt is a unit of power , like how strong a man is .
A watt-hour is a unit of energy , like the work accomplished by that man in 1 hour .
Christianity as a whole is both growing and mutating in ways that observers in the West tend not to see .
An example is the wooly rhino , which lived from 350,00 years ago up until around 10,000 years ago .
You might think that putting up a sermon is the easiest kind of post .
A yeoman was the lowest rank of landowner , one who worked his own land or his families land , in modern terminology a peasant farmer .
A villain was a sharecropper , a farmer with no land of his own , semi free , more free than a serf , though not directly equivalent to the modern free laborer .
In order to avoid repudiating roman law without violating natural law , the English courts had to perform elaborate contortions , and today the 59th sole prerogative of the holy roman emperor still lives on in America , in the form of the concession theory , which holds that a corporation is a part of the state , a portion of state power in private hands .
Under the code of Justinian a corporation is a fictitious person created by the fiat of the holy roman emperor .
A right is no right at all if it is granted to you by the benevolence of your masters .
How big a deal is this indirect cloud effect ?
A janitor is an individual who is responsible for keeping the hotels , office premises , apartments , flats or buildings in a neat and tidy condition .
But we came through it , and a win is a win .
But a win is a win and only 3 points , after all we only dropped 3 points at OT , or is there a ManU rule that says if they win by 7 or more goals they get extra points ?
We scraped through , but a win is a win .
The last member of the Royal Family to take part in a war was the Duke of York , who flew helicopters for the Royal Navy during the Falklands conflict in 1982 .
But a malefic in good state and in a favorable house such as the tenth will cause honors and prestige , especially if in its exaltation ( because exaltation , among the other possible dignities of a planet is the one most analogous to honors ) and not squared or opposed or in some adverse relation to the Sun or Moon , as the luminaries are particularly analogous to honors . ...
It is usually the case that the best form of heating for a church is a traditional ' wet ' system of radiators and pipework operated by a modern gas-fired boiler and controlled by modern timing and thermostatic / humidistatic equipment .
This image showing a line of men seated at a bar is a good example of the compassionate yet unromantic way in which he represented everyday life .
More of a problem is a lack of user education , meaning users storing their work on local drives , desktops , My Documents etc , and the backups running across the servers every night , backing up the same stuff they 've been backing up since they were started .
An iNAV is an indication of the price at which shares of an ETF can be purchased on the secondary market and , where published , is constantly updated throughout the day to reflect the extent of trading in the ETF shares .
When he argued that stock market crises do not necessarily reduce the amount of wealth being produced , but that ' a crash is a sign that something is going amiss with the wider system of production ' , he was explaining very well the coming developments in Japan .
An example of such a page is the Information icon , labelled Some F. A. Q. on your course 's homepage ( see Figure 4 -4 ) .
A podcast is a series of related audio or video files , placed online with a public URL and linked to via an RSS feed , which you can download to digital media players .
No matter that a child was the only being " naturally " unhairy .
Another technique for dealing with an outsider was the truthful non-response .
Knowledge is knowing that a tomato is a fruit ; wisdom is knowing not to put one in a fruit salad .
After the war Droller was recruited into the Central Intelligence Agency and for a while was a desk officer in Switzerland .
A value is an object chosen from a defined set , which is its type e.g. -3 , -2 , -1 , 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 are all values of type integer .
Instance is often used slightly differently , when we say that each identifier of a type is a different instance of that type .
[ 1 ] A lion of this type wearing a crown is a symbol of the English royalty .
A questor was an assizer or professional juror , who made a profit out of inquests by holding them , or alternatively giving false evidence - and to some , in effect no more than a money-grabbing busybody .
" Management Today " is a great source of material for any aspiring manager and their recent feature on how to give a career plan a makeover was both relevant and current to the times .
Going from being a reader to a writer is a big leap , one you 've already made .
A coalition is an alliance of people or groups working together for a shared purpose .
A MIP is a regular savings tax wrapper which can provide a flexible way to save over a period of 10 years or more for an income in retirement .
Prior to that duty coming into force , it has firstly to establish whether a route is a right of way .
Dick Wilkinson , secretary of the Royal Humane Society , said : " To save a life is the most wonderful thing any-one can do for a fellow human being .
Assurances were given that the breakdown of data required was relevant in that it was intended to identify whether the socio-economic background of a child was a determining factor in exclusion from school and also to ensure that there was no discrimination by the local authority .
If a spot was a bit further back from the lines , it was nothing for him to fill the whole inside of a bridge , making us use ladders to paint above him ..
A. Yes , putting in a bid is a long process because you have to wait for central government to review its list of potential world heritage sites to put forward to UNESCO .
As it turned out , writing a novel was a kind of natural step from there .
The process of writing a novel is a series of seemingly endless decisions .
What interests me very much as a writer is the ability for writing to have our lives to be occupied so vividly by others .
Eventually , the licence came through and John took on a multitude of roles deciding that everyone being a volunteer was the way ahead .
The core value of a university is the free expression of ideas .
A nation is a community of values ; and nationalism is a consciousness of values .
It is of interest to note here that liberal-egalitarian intellectuals oftentimes claim that nationalists believe that a nation is a totally unchanging entity in terms of character , while Moeller 's concept of conservatism and nationalism , as explained above , entirely defies these anti-nationalist prejudices .
Something you hear time and time again in the office of a ladymag is the need for a " takeaway " : What do we want the reader to take away from this piece ?
And the cliff scene where the bonging bell is gouged from the ruins of a monastery is a sharp , thrilling sight .
Since we have decided to call electrons " negatively " charged ( thanks , Ben ! ) , the negative end of a battery is that end which tries to push electrons out of it .
A widget is a piece of code - typically written in Flash or Javascript - that resides on a desktop or web page and performs a specific function .
In general , a platform is a software environment in which third party applications may be loaded and run .
At the top of the list of processes in need of a reboot is the way in which students progress through the educational system .
In short , to be an Essayist was the bent of his nature and genius .
Medically and economically speaking , a vasectomy is the most effective , simplest , and least costly method to control population .
A self employed man is a hero in his own story ; an employee is a mere human resource .
If a person is a Male , he is much MORE prone than the average Male to have sexual problems such as premature ejaculation .
If a person is a Female , she is also MORE prone to be unable to gain FULL sexual satisfaction .
A pad is a ring of copper on one side of the board only , while a via is a " double-pad " where two pads on opposite sides of the board are electrically joined through the board to form one connection .
specifies that a particular field in a a packet is a port number .
A mushroom is the fleshy , spore-bearing fruiting body of a fungus , typically produced above ground on soil or on its food source .
01.10.11 - On January 22 , 1973 , the United States Supreme Court struck down Texas 's criminal abortion laws , finding that the right to decide whether to have a child is a fundamental right guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution .
I am past tired of the way cyberpunk stories ( in all mediums ) present female embodiment as being fundamentally different from male embodiment , as if a human body by default has to be male , and anything with a vagina is An Issue that requires Plot Points .
As far as I can see , if we are unwilling to hold women strictly accountable for their actions , we have only one logical recourse available : a return to the ancient Roman legal doctrine that a woman is a perpetual minor .
Hence , the strategy of taking a taxi was a poor one .
An entrepreneur is a risk taker , whose success is evaluated in the marketplace and not in the laboratory or within the internal bureaucracy of an institution .
Although none of Kearsley 's ( 1995 ) questions were answered directly , our analysis informs administrators and faculty alike about whether interaction affects retention , whether frequency and intensity of interaction in a course is a meaningful measure , what forms of interaction are the most critical , and whether the pattern of interaction should change over the course of a program .
And getting new products into a design was a very long and arduous process , and I think it still is today .
In ancient times a magician was a wise person , an illuminated person who had developed in his occult anatomy the annular serpentine fire that develops in the ascetic 's body .
The fundamental groupoid of a space is a logical construction .
A pre-Ramadan picnic called a mfungo was a big event in the community as was the Vugo , the procession through the streets of women taking the dowry to the bride 's family .
If you think a deal is the cheapest regular rate you can find , you may also be thinking you have to sacrifice cleanliness or comfort .
Tendocalcaneal Bursitis : A bursa is a fluid-filled sac designed to limit friction between rubbing parts .
These recommendations include the concepts that a pattern is both widespread and continuing over time , involves more than isolated violations , and does not require a specific number of violations .
If a company is the world leader in a special technology and you need that technology , then it makes sense to join them .
Cost sharing with a partner is a good alternative .
A whipping 's the only thing you have to fear , and you may avoid that if you 'll learn to please me .
But if you abhor the thought of being trapped on a rail car or tour bus for long hours , a car is the only way to see Europe .
I do n't think such a thing is an option for me as a Christian .
The slow work of healing a soul is the greatest pastoral work anyone every undertakes .
GPT : Starting your solo campaign into the world of games development with a shoot-em-up is a bit brave .
It may also be that excluding knowledge that does n't really contribute to a commons is a good way to protect a commons .
Of course many objects that are not circles satisfy this description ; i.e. spheres , ovals , ellipses , etc. After a discussion with the students I was able to convince them that a circle is the set of points equidistant from a particular point .
Making a difference is a motivation that most of us share .
A control is a sample that is treated exactly like the experimental group except that the independent variable is not applied to the control .
A mantra is a certain type of verse , a combination of carefully selected sounds that together create a nucleus of spiritual energy .
A kem is a kind of practice , technique or custom that is followed in order to obtain some favourable effect such as relief from a specific illness .
As has been stated , such an arrangement is the result of the exercise of the right of two or more individuals to unite their rights , perfectly independent of every outside party .
The living room with a fireplace was the first room on the right .
So it means literally a person is a person through other people .
A thing is a thing only in the way that it relates to other things .
) in terms of an adjunction between a category CNCN of count nouns and a category MNMN of mass nouns : & hashtagblank ;\ bullet The morphisms in these categories are relationships like " a man is a human , " resp .
But patenting at a university is a rather complicated affair ; either you do it privately , and then it 's expensive .
An illustration is the behavior of chromosomes in the hybrid plant produced by the cross of N. tabacum by N. plumbaginifolia .
A doctrine is a roughly a kind of category , thought of as a kind of logical theory .
The value of a temple is the topmost number on the temple .
A topos is a category with enough good properties ( including cartesian closedness ) that it acts like the category of sets .
A site is a small category together with a Grothendieck coverage ( also known as a Grothendieck topology ) .
A highlight is the Grand Prix , awarded this year to Swiss startup Irewind , " for its system with cameras , which follow a movement , recognize it , mount it as an image and immediately puts it on display in the shape of a customized film to anyone who has a smartphone , " the exhibit says in a press release .
The simplest answer would just be to say " nowhere " , since after all a morphism is an equivalence class of terms .
There are models of PCF that have a lot of intensional content , such as Hyland and Ong 's category of games , where a morphism is a strategy for carrying out the computation .
How does this square with the idea that a morphism is a " program " ?
Well , in the lowly approach , a morphism is an equivalence class of programs : a set of programs that are indistinguishable by their input-output relations .
or an algebra of an operad is an operad homomorphism , etc. This way of thinking has proved itself over the years .
What lifted it out of the common run and turned it into a legend was the image of a man and a horse riding the waves .
Deciding to do a doctorate is the most active decision I 've ever made .
My deciding to have a family was a key turning point in my career as I decided that I did not want to work full-time and be a parent .
A trophy is a bonus but not a necessity ...
What I care about as a fan is the lack of good football .
nevillechamberlain ( 09 / 09 / 2010 09:57:4 0 ) During the early 90 s , while working for a city daily in the Midlands I met a WW 2 veteran in our library who told me a tale of how he and a colleague were the first British servicemen to be allowed into the ruins of Hitlers office ( ushered in by the Red Army ) .
In a ground breaking case , Thames Valley Police claimed that receipt of a text was the distraction that caused Philippa Curtis to plough into Victoria 's stationary car which had broken down .
I can see why people might get annoyed about bad reviews on this phone since nowadays a phone is a fashion accessory and a bad review is like insulting someone .
" You may believe it is , but that is why it is healthier to simply admit to yourself that your hate is aimed at the person , because the idea that you are feeling that passionately about a behavior is a lie to yourself ; the worst kind of poison .
Just like a bible is a dogmatic belief system so is the WMM .
Help to save your life and a bird 's this Christmas by spurning the Christmas roast , says leading health charity , the Vegetarian and Vegan Foundation ( VVF ) .
Where an allegation was made that a document was a sham , it had to be put expressly with evidence and an opportunity to put the point in cross-examination .
A relapse is a sudden episode of symptoms or disability .
Steroids do not always improve symptoms and long-term recovery from a relapse is the same whether or not steroids are used .
A cookie is a piece of information in the form of a very small text file that is placed on an internet user 's hard drive .
By the way , the example of lego bricks being flung into the air and making a house is a terrible analogy .
To be a scientist is a great privilege .
A botnet is a network of virus-infected computers that are used together and can be remotely controlled .
A scam is an illegal scheme that tries to trick you out of your money .
A criterion is a predicate to be satisfied to consider the testing activity ended and the program tested enough [ 3 ] .
The culture of an organisation is an extremely powerful determinant of people 's behaviour .
The fashion for show gardens with a message is a horticultural version of the charity ' chuggers ' .
Yes what is wrong with a garden being a garden which speaks on the level of aesthetics , about pleasing the heart and eye ?
I replied A chunk is a chunk .
A chunk is a big or a small bit , can be different size but it always makes sense and it a whole .
In this context , a performance is any use of the script , regardless of the presence or absence of an audience .
Renting out a property is a business transaction and should be treated with the appropriate formality regardless of who the tenant is .
Being able to spot abnormalities and comment that you need to ask for help from a radiologist is the important part .
Sitting by a window is the restaurant 's owner , 38 - year-old Andrew Hartley .
A budget is an important concept in microeconomics , which uses a budget line to illustrate the trade-offs between two or more goods .
In other terms , a budget is an organisational plan stated in monetary terms .
With all our love - Dad , Mum and Lyall xxx Moment musical in Assynt A mountain is a sort of music : theme And counter theme displaced in air amongst Their own variations .
The second thing I learned is that pound for pound , a deer is a LOT stronger than a cow or a colt .
Question : A person who orders a crime is a criminal .
In theological typology , a type is a person , event , situation , etc. , that prefigures some part of one which will come : Moses 's need to be hidden as a baby to avoid the wholesale slaying of babies makes him a type of Christ ; the Flood experienced by Noah is , to some , a type of the destruction written of in Revelation ; and so on .
A doxology is a praise given to God which usually ends with an Amen .
A benediction is a request , normally through prayer , for a divine blessing .
Matrix Representation : A matrix is a rectangular array of elements , which can be symbols , symbolic expressions , or numbers .
A lie is a deliberate untruth .
A database is a a collection of " relation valued " variables ( aka RelVars , variables whose value at any point in time is a relation ) , together with the set of integrity constraints that the data must satisfy .
And a relation is a set of tuples , all corresponding to the relation header .
But a press is the best piece of equipment for taking the roll to a finished product .
Third point : Tony 's viewpoint that abortion is murder is based upon the belief that an embryo or a fetus is a human being .
and what an evil was the bargain they made !
Again from my Dad , a sledge is a 8 # micro adjuster .
Ken , around here a bushhog is a chopper , as opposed to a rotary mower ( for lawns only ) .
While this is an issue that needs much further discussion , the United States believes that such a right is an important part of the Berne Protocol and New Instrument which would be aimed at meeting the needs of the emerging GII .
I know that a creed is the shell of a lie .
Teaching at a buxiban is a good option for someone who prefers not to secure a job through government channels before arriving in China .
An example is this photo in which the rue anemone flower seems to float above the out of focus , somewhat ethereal background .
I have always known that a fetus was a living thing .
They complete a whole-group activity then play a station activity game where they determine if part of a sentence is the cause or effect .
A harvester is a client application that issues OAI-PMH requests .
A repository is a network accessible server that can process the 6 OAI-PMH requests in the manner described in this document .
resource - A resource is the object or " stuff " that metadata is " about " .
item - An item is a constituent of a repository from which metadata about a resource can be disseminated .
An item is a constituent of a repository from which metadata about a resource can be disseminated .
A set is an optional construct for grouping items for the purpose of selective harvesting .
While I commend those Canadian IMG 's who work hard enough to have a shot at a Canadian residency , becoming a doctor is a privilege not a right .
Becoming a doctor is a privilege , not an entitlement and it 's in Canada 's best interest to get the best talent trained abroad .
So true : becoming a doctor is a privilege not a right .
What kind of a rule is this that denies Canadian doctors studying abroad to be denied a placement in their own country .
Another advantage of using the rear gunner 's position for a stokid is the ability to have the tandem built such that it is the shortest seat post on the tandem which will allow you to move away from the kiddie-cranks months if not years earlier .
A tandem is a tandem is a tandem .
These studies , Taubes says , are intended to test what he calls " the central dogma of obesity , that a calorie is a calorie .
It 's a message we hear from the food and drink industry over and over again : that a calorie is a calorie is a calorie , and that the true cause of obesity is a failure to burn them off .
" " It 's always been very important to the sugar industry that a calorie is a calorie , " says Taubes .
HP UFT 12 < \ / A > is a unified interface for building and managing automations of all types eliminating the effort and learning involved in using multiple tools .
A thermometer is an instrument that measures the temperature .
Listserv Messages : Signing up for a listserv is a step that requires little energy yet yields great rewards : iccweb.ucdavis.edu / students / ListServSig nup.htm. You will get a weekly message that highlights upcoming workshops and events .
In sport , a racket is a device , similar to a bat , comprising a handle ending in a round or oval frame across which a network of cord is tightly strung forming the striking surface , distinct from a bat which has a solid striking surface .
In fencing , a repartee is a smart return blow .
A retiarius was a Roman gladiator armed with a trident , net and dagger and with an armoured defense for the left shoulder and leather armoured left sleeve .
In card games a rubber is a set of games .
In card games a ruff is a card of the suit of trumps .
A rape is a rape is a rape ?
The assumption that the oppressed cannot be an oppressor is a false one .
The former is canted upward from the latter like the nested rings of a gimbal ( a recent example of a gimbal is the rings of the " spaceship " in the movie Contact ) .
A scone is a lovely thing not least that it lends itself to many unusual flavours both sweet and savoury .
A prorogation terminates a session ; an adjournment is an interruption in the course of a single session .
An apostille or an authentication is a document that certifies the authenticity of the signature , seal and position of the official who has executed , issued or certified a copy of a public document .
An apostille is a certification form set out in a treaty called The Hague Convention Abolishing the Requirement of Legalization for Foreign Public Documents ( 1961 ) .
I thought I 'd never be a decent programmer , I thought a breadboard was a baking implement , and I certainly did n't think I was going to engineering school .
A shredder is a fairly inexpensive investment to keep in your home , and can keep Dumpster divers from using your information to commit identity theft .
A commons is a resource whose costs are shared by many but whose benefits can be captured by just a few -- usually those who are first to use it or who try to take the most .
The classic example of a commons is a community-owned grassland .
An official is any person who controls the actual play of a competition by the application of the rules and laws of the sport to make judgements on the rule infringements , performance , time or score .
A tribunal is a forum for dispute resolution .
Again , I 'm not blaming the victims ( as if Christians as a whole are the victims ) .
Get as many backlinks A backlink is a link Blog or Website feedback you get from your blog or other website .
An image is a representation of something : if there 's nothing to represent , or it is n't clear what the representation is trying to be , then why bother at all ?
In essence , only a Recommendation is the final specification , everything else is a work in progress .
Discuss the definition of a biome and describe major biomes of the Earth : A biome is a community of plants and animals that live in a particular region and climate .
On a corner was a new place that he did n't know yet .
" Hmm , " said Schäfer , " a dog 's a fine thing .
" A banker is a fellow who lends you his umbrella when the sun is shining and wants it back the minute it begins to rain " ( uriblank ) Mark Twain ( uriblank ) Been there , done that .
To a Muslim , a pig is a filthy animal .
Put your charcoal disc on a brick , or an incense burner ( well away from anything flammable or meltable ) You put a flame ( a lighter is a good idea , a match wouldnt burn for long enough ) to the disc , and in a few moments the disc starts glowing red where you put your flame .
If a rescue is a UK charity registered with the Charities Trust , you can go to Everyclick and raise money for them for free !
I wonder if an MK 15 is louder :P As far as I can remember being taught I 'm sure the spoon is held in place by the pin , the spoon is also preventing the striker spring from striking the cap , a striker is a bit like the firing pin in a gun , the striker is inside a spring which is coiled up and held in place by the spoon .
Plus , setting up the Pierburg for anything but every day N / A running is a pain in the arse .
A degree is a degree , and good on you for pursuing a worthwhile career path .
Sometimes a strike is the only way !
That the peregrine even has a future is a fact worth celebrating .
If you have a light coloured car i.e. silver then a sealant is the wise choice , something like megs # 21 or Zaino if you want a really durable product .
Well , being a poet is a funny kind of jazz .
Works of art on paper are by tendency fragile and the aging of a print is a natural chemical and biological process .
A progressive is a man who , while beating you over the head with his " Support NPR " poster , simultaneously lectures you on the evils of violence .
A progressive is a woman who chants " Free speech !
A progressive is an academic who looks upon a fallen world and would fix it by Theory , by preaching that the ends justify the means .
RE : " A progressive is an academic who looks upon a fallen world and would fix it by Theory , by preaching that the ends justify the means .
If you 've heard of a school of fish or a murder of crows , then a murmuration is a collective noun for a grouping of starlings .
Given the importance attached to the difference between a dwelling and a non-dwelling , Prosecutors should be prepared to pursue cases as dwelling burglaries whenever it is realistic to plead that a building is a dwelling .
For many parents , it 's difficult entrusting a child 's well-being into a stranger 's care , as a child is the most important person in a parent 's life .
" Yes , they did not send some of our guys that could have gone in , and whether they could have made a difference is a whole different question ... but Bolling , in a rare instance here , was n't just totally making it up , and did n't go all the way over the top and call President Obama and Hillary Clinton a damn murderer , as Geraldo suggested .
Facilities requiring a permit are those with certain waste control structures , and those over a designated live weight .
Dictionary.com says that a bully is an " overbearing person who habitually badgers and intimidates smaller or weaker people " as a noun .
The loss of a child is a deep ache that continues to burn long after the funeral and condolences end .
But when he decided to push for health reform in the spring of 2009 , he discovered that Senate Finance Committee chairman Max Baucus , a centrist Democrat who took the lead on reform , thought a mandate was the only path to a filibuster-proof majority .
The motion of a rocket is a nice example of a system with a variable mass in which nevertheless conservation of linear momentum can be applied .
Once a referral has been made , trained experts in the CA will assess the case and make a decision on whether an individual is a victim of trafficking .
A spade is a spade is a spade .
If a metropolis is the capital of a country , what would one call the capital of the world ?
An ancient Greek who lived in a city was a polites " citizen " , which gives us policy , police , polity and politics .
An aerator is an inexpensive piece of hardware that attaches to the tip of your faucet and mixes air into the water stream .
" The works : Painting as Multitude Painting as a Multitude is the technique I am using to explore the moods and tides of emergence .
A criminal is a person with predatory instincts who does not have enough capital to form a corporation .
As explained in a previous post by Chris Derrick , the histogram on your digital camera of a shot is a simple bar graph .
Whether you own a home , a summer cottage , a Porsche 911 , and a huge stock portfolio , or simply a car , a computer , and some household furnishings , if you want your property to go to the people that you designate , a will is a must .
( db ) where an application is a second or subsequent application during the same period of erasure the Chairman shall invite the applicant to address the Committee on the question of whether his right to make further applications should be suspended indefinitely .
How much of a hint is this exactly ?
We have to carry the idea so beloved of defence ministers of recent times that the ship is just a platform and that real value its construction in terms of wealth preservation as a whole is the fit out the high end value added stuff .
Sometimes what we need at a time is a ' We can do it ' moment .
A scarf is a piece of fabric worn around the neck , or near the head or around the waist for warmth , cleanliness , fashion or for religious reasons .
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State , Home Office ( Lord West of Spithead ) : The decision to close a motorway is an operational matter for the police .
Here in a nutshell is the philosophical difference between Watson and Greenpeace : while Greenpeace will bravely zip in dinghies between the harpoon ship and the whale , Watson is prepared to ram the whaling boat and cut its harpoon off .
Managing a crisis is a big slice in maintaining a credible reputation .
Until then , my concept of a firework was a cardboard tube wrapped in coloured paper with a paper fuse sticking out of the top .
A person is an existing operator in respect of an application for a particular kind of operating licence if , when he applies for the operating licence , he holds the equivalent authorisation under the 1963 , 1968 or 1976 Act ( " the existing legislation " ) , or he is making ( or is the subject of ) an application for such an authorisation .
A person is the existing premises operator in respect of an application for a particular kind of premises licence if , when he applies for the premises licence , he holds the equivalent permission under the 1963 or 1968 Act ( " the existing legislation " ) in relation to the same or substantially the same premises , or he is making ( or is the subject of ) an application for such a permission .
A person is an existing FEC operator if , when he applies for the permit , he is the holder of a permit under section 34 of the 1968 Act granted in respect of amusement machine premises and expressed to be for the purposes of section 34 ( 1 ) of the 1968 Act .
A person is an existing operator if , when he applies for the permit , he is the holder of a permit under section 16 of the 1976 Act .
1 A trave is a shock , or twelve sheaves of corn in the car .
and also the objection to " crime of passion " as a label is a very important point .
Refinancing a loan is the process by which someone pays off an existing loan by taking out a new loan .
If you have a suspicion about a member being a troll or a fake please EMAIL the babyworld .
There are allegations that Arthur Mutambara 's refusal to step down and allow MDC-N President Welshman Ncube to take over as a principal is a ' CIO project ' intended to collapse the inclusive government .
( 6 ) In this regulation , a reference to an article is a reference to an article of the 2006 Structural Funds Regulation .
( 2 ) In this regulation , a reference to an article is a reference to an article of the 2006 European Regional Development Fund Regulation .
The leaf of a fern is a good example , where the fronds of the leaf are the shape of the leaf itself , and the subdivisions of the frond are the same shape again , and on , and on to beyond the limits of the human eye .
So , the gulf opens between those who are connected and those who think an office with a door is a sign of success .
A marriage is a far more complex project than any business partnership , and centralized control does n't work real well there .
A movie is a movie and we are simply shooting a touching story about Confucius , " he told reporters in Taipei .
Better than a petname is a graphical image selected by her , as graphics provide a much more efficient delivery of security information to the user ( Ref : Herzberg & Gbara ) .
In many cases , a parent is the first to notice something wrong with their child 's eye .
Giving pain a number is the best describing factor .
An ellipsis is a series of three periods with a space before the first period , one after the last period , and a space between the periods ( . . ) .
A chromosome is a long strand of DNA .
At the end of a chromosome is a telomere , which acts like a bookend .
Running from a cop is the worst decision she could make in that position .
A goiter is the result of the lack of iodine in the shark 's diet .
Note that a 50 % drop in the entire equities market was a " correction " , a 40 % drop in a specific stock is a " pullback " , but a 29 % drop in gold over the course of a year is a " collapse " .
A eunuch is a man who has been castrated or was born without testes .
A toner is an extremely beneficial addition to your skincare routine , but there 's no need to spend your hard earned money on a bunch of frosty glass bottles and watered down alcohol solutions .
Since at least the time of the Peel Commission in 1937 it has been recognised that a partition is the only workable solution .
An alias is a screen name and must be unique .
A delta is a sediment deposit that forms when a stream enters a standing body of water .
I mean , everyone knows being a liberal is the kiss of death , right ?
" Therefore , the serpent could n't have been doing the tempting for two reasons : One , a serpent is an animal , and an animal ca n't talk to humans by nature .
The night as a whole is an exploration of love and relationships .
as a whole is a hysterically entertaining parody of Broadway-with heart .
Mimicking R & B divas ( Whitney Houston , Tina Turner , Diana Ross , Patti LaBelle and Lil ' Kim ) by dancing and changing wigs , he says , " Being a woman is a performance , especially if she is black .
A second is an algorithmic evaluation of the taken image prior to demosaicking .
Libertarians may object on the basis of freedom , but selling freedom - or even wealth - to a non-libertarian is another matter .
Buying a home is another great example of how money can bring success .
An inch and a half is the perfect thickness for a steak .
Hierarchically , such a courtyard was a place for conspicuous restraint rather than conspicuous display .
Kevin Brennan : But of course a caution is an admission of guilt by an individual of the commission of a criminal offence .
Disraeli also said that a majority is the best repartee , and I cannot win a vote if I press my amendments to a Division .
Wardships A ward was a minor ( under the age of 21 ) who was placed in the care of a guardian .
A cistron is the shortest length of DNA that can code for a whole polypeptide .
One of the latest to receive a writ is the Belgian Foreign Minister , Louis Michel , who has been accused over arms sales to Nepal .
as a game is the equivalent of Jeremy Clarkson casting his critical eye over a caravan .
A flight and a hotel is a holiday , whether it is sold by an airline , a travel agent or a tour operator .
It would not be a matter of the UKBA having to publish that information ; what I want to know as a passenger is the length of time between landing and my being out of the airport .
[ 16 ] These were all situations in which , if an individual were a party litigant , the court would accommodate them to some degree .
[ 29 ] We have also reached the conclusion that the enrolling of a reclaiming motion in an action to which a person is a party , whether as a pursuer or defender , may properly be seen as the institution of proceedings susceptible of control under section 1 of the 1898 Act .
One reason for requiring such a clause is that insolvency of a subsidiary or enterprise in which a sizeable interest is held would trigger a default clause in the group financing documents of one of the co-venturers and accordingly result in all monies outstanding under those documents falling due immediately .
My story is an ongoing one but I think I would say do n't mess about with herbal remedies - a sarcoid is a skin cancer after all - get the vet to help you .
A story is the strategic insertion of inchoate pronouns in an inchoate situation into a story line which makes a move and leads to a performance .
The basic assertion here is : A story is a strategic insertion [ of the inchoate ] into a story line .
( Note , anybody particularly interested in this part of the trip should stand on the 9 O ' clock side of the boat , as it is not repeated on the way back to shore . ) Out at sea , the first birds to make an appearance were the Sooty Shearwaters , closely followed by smaller numbers of Pink-footeds and the odd one or two Buller 's Shearwaters .
The defining characteristic of a cluster is the close proximity of related firms .
It is said that buying a house is the 3rd most stressful thing most of us will ever do and if you do n't have confidence in your representation it can be made all the worse .
Being able to permanently disenfranchise those who have been convicted of a felony is a pretty neat trick .
Jeeze - what sort of a day is this ?! . .
A pelisse was a garment half way between a coat and a dress and usually calf length .
A ban is the way to go .
Or did you buy it just because at way back in the Pre-iPad Era , a notebook was the only mobile device available that could handle such a wide variety of tasks ?
Do you think the people making the movie try to be secretive because they want people to go into their movie fresh or are they just aware how much extra interest the movie will generate if they act like certain aspects of a movie are a secret ?
" Are they just aware how much extra interest the movie will generate if they act like certain aspects of a movie are a secret ?
The red colour of an apple is a quality of the apple , experienced by a human being as a red hue , which , in Locke 's terminology , is an idea .
A verb is a part of speech that shows action or a state of being .
Looks like I hit a nerve with someone who thinks squatting in a tent is the way to solve all the problems of the world .
The luminance of a pixel is a function of the red , green and blue values .
I need the entire contract , because a contract is a living document , and what it says on page 13 has an impact on what it says on page 2 .
A theory is a theory until it is proven .
JR : I believe that people should eat more berries-a half a cup a day is a reasonable goal-more leafy greens and reds [ beet greens , red kale , red cabbage , red lettuces , and radicchio , particularly radicchio di Treviso ] , and eat the skins of fruits and vegetables , provided they 're organic .
The only people saying we 're not in a depression are the people who still have jobs and a home .
An example was the fall 1938 law that banned marriages between Italian citizens and the colored ( " Colonial subjects " ) .
The definition of a sidebar is a short bit of information alongside a longer story in a publication or online , or a discussion between lawyers and a judge where jurors ca n't overhear .
An example of a sidebar is a more detailed list of notable dates in his presidency printed next to an article about Barack Obama .
A breaker is the only thing that can beat a simgle Two .
It 's certainly a bad sign when a subatomic-particle-of-the-week is the only relief for a stalled plot , and even more disturbing when the finished product endorses the most unbelievable contradictions of established science .
A wage is a concrete concept , but it should actually be just a transitional demand , because you do n't want to become a wage slave either .
Once this has been on the market for awhile , you 'll be able to tell from a distance or in an instant whether a phone is an iPhone or not .
After the condemnation of the Arians it was shown that to exalt a creature was no recognition of its divinity .
This meant he was always on neutral ground as it did not come under one complete jurisdiction , which in a way is a similar theory .
( Perhaps you thought a report was a kind of document or presentation .
Finding and hiring the best applicant for a job is no easy task .
The second most common cause of a stroke is a brain haemorrhage , which occurs when a blood vessel bursts inside the head .
( Also listed in first aid training Directory ) Document Management Sign a Case Sign a Case are a North West Manchester based document management company providing Document Check , Explanation & Sign Up Services for the Legal , Insurance and Financial Sectors .
Hmm , not as is a footbridge is a ' prohibited place ' .
An example is the bespoke ' Flip Flop ' post box shown above .
Moreover an appeal panel is independent - a review is an internal admission authority procedure , and arguably not independent .
A puppy is a family companion and as such we always encourage the attendance to classes of all available members of the family including children of a suitable age .
And when a film is this divisive , i.e. provoking discussion , it 's surely worth at least a watch .
Standing tall and facing down your death like a man is the only saving grace , and a bloody , unpleasant one at that .
Turning up with a hangover is a grey area .
The first person to mention the actual preservation of a shroud is the chronicler of the pilgrimage of St Antoninus Martyr about 570 , describing a cave convent on the banks of the Jordan : " In the same place is said to be the sudarium , which was over the head of Jesus " .
The best diet for a dog is a high quality , commercially prepared food , bought from either your vet , a large pet store or an on-line pharmacy .
A colonnade is the next threshold , a commercial area with eclectic buildings .
Keeping this sector of the economy thriving , particularly in a downturn is a priority for most politicians .
" What makes the disc into a must-hear is the pairing with the three Concerto a due cori , Handel 's last , ebullient recycling of " greatest hits " from his operas and Italian cantatas .
I 'm thinking that an op-amp is an op-amp .
A business plan can tell you wether an idea is a good one or bad one , wether competitors will be too strong or wether they have weak points you can exploit .
A few short years ago , in 1998 , establishing such an inquiry was a bold and courageous step .
For instance , if a railroad is the only industrial landowner in the township , or county , or town , or , or , or , ... it will frequently be given the privilege of being disproportionately taxed , one way or another .
( b ) a function is a devolved Welsh function if it relates to a matter in respect of which functions are exercisable by the Welsh Ministers , the First Minister for Wales or the Counsel General to the Welsh Assembly 35 Government , or to a matter within the legislative competence of the National Assembly for Wales .
I do n't think being a nun is the answer just shutting off from the world .
Helyn Clack , Surrey County Council 's member for the 2012 Olympics , said : " Picking a winner was a tough task for the judges , as there were so many excellent entries .
That said the image quality at this level is arguably still usable and in a sense is a great deal more attractive than that produced by many of its peers .
i dont know how much you know ... an integer is a whole number ( no decimals or fractions ) .
The inside of a van is a large area to protect so do you need a few ultrasonics to fully protect .
If the events of the last 6 months remind the world anything it 's that : " Politics is turbulent place , where a week is a long time , and so ( even ) a decade into the future , is impossible to confidently predict .
And Jim , not to be too pedantic but while a " nickle " might be worn around the neck in the form of a pendant , a nickel is the term used for a north American 5 c coin .
Gentleman that maintaining a quango is a guaranteed way to achieve that .
If publishing a book is the academic promised land , Stephen Casper asks why we do n't learn from those already self-publishing ?
Surely a contract is a contract ?
In Luther 's theological view , a changeling was a child of the devil without a human soul , " only a piece of flesh .
If we are thinking about next steps , there are lessons for the Government and a debate in the House , but consideration of an inquest is the most important next step to be taken .
" Storming a room is an amazing feeling , " he said .
Joining a union is the obvious way to improve conditions at work , a long fought for legacy from our sisters and brothers of the past .
A cohort is a group of 10 to 15 adult students who complete the DCP as a unit .
QUESTION : Can an Imam be an authority over a masjid and never lead the prayer or do Jumah ?
Professor of Computer Science : A kiss is a few bits of love compiled into a byte .
Professor of Geometry : A kiss is the shortest distance between two straight lines .
Professor of Physics : A kiss is the contraction of mouth due to the expansion of the heart .
Professor of Chemistry : A kiss is the reaction of the interaction between two hearts .
Professor of Zoology : A kiss is the interchange of unisexual salivary bacteria .
Professor of Physiology : A kiss is the juxtaposition of two orbicularis oris muscles in the state of contraction .
Professor of Accountancy : A kiss is a credit because it is profitable when returned .
Professor of Economics : A kiss is that thing for which the demand is higher than the supply .
Professor of Statistics : A kiss is an event whose probability depends on the vital statistics of 36-24-36 .
Professor of Philosophy : A kiss is the persecution for the child , ecstasy for the youth and homage for the old .
Professor of English : A kiss is a noun that is used as a conjunction ; it is more common than proper ; it is spoken in the plural ; and it is applicable to all .
I think , in ADA , it 's direct threat to others , but -- then that 's my -- I 've not studied that enough , but I mean , I think if a child is a direct threat to themselves , that certainly is something that you would want to consider .
The main reason for such a change is the rocketing oil prices , dramatically increasing Algeria 's resources , with reserves amounting currently to some 100 billion dollars , exacerbating the appetite of the ' umbrella 's ' factions .
A timeshare is a partial ownership right to a property .
The term qualified individual with a disability is a person who either with or without reasonable accommodation can perform the essential functions of a job .
An oral tradition is called an hadith ( singular ) ; a collection is an ahadith ( plural ) .
An important aspect of the Islamization of a society is the imposition of these seventh century Arabic cultural ideals and superstitions upon today 's societies .
Reading a book is a commitment .
A trust is a legal device by which property is held by one person ( the trustee ) for the benefit of another ( the beneficiary ) .
Two , a fever is a temperature of 100.4 and above .
Whether a task force formed by a superintendent is a public governmental body for the purposes of the Sunshine Law of Missouri so that any meeting held by the task force is subject to Missouri 's Sunshine Law .
In hindsight it is recognised that the rains that have lashed the country for a month are the start of the Flood .
the Prophet said , " A Muslim cannot be the heir of a disbeliever , nor can a disbeliever be the heir of a Muslim .
A woman is the full circle .
A : A cryoprotectant is a small molecule that easily penetrates inside cells and that depresses the freezing point of water .
But they need not have ends in all cases since the entire circumference of a circle is an example of a line .
One piece of terminology that Euclid did not mention explicitly in a definition is a phrase to indicate when a line passes through a point .
" Roughly translated , it means that the only impossible things for a firefighter are the things that are impossible to God .
But I think admitting you 're an addict is the first step towards recovery .
And , they draw the only conclusion that makes any sense : a career is an experience in misery .
A object is a single-threaded context for producing and consuming messages .
A paradigm is a set of interconnected , mutually supporting ideas that define a worldview .
Gillian Lockwood , former vice chair of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists ethics committee , told BBC Radio 4 's Today programme : " Every clinician working in the field in the UK is very well aware that a foetus being the wrong gender is not grounds for termination under any circumstances .
Thus , the stealing of an ox is a matter to be investigated by a police officer , whereas not having enough sex with your wife if you 're a camel driver is not .
People who are hungry and out of a job are the stuff of which dictatorships are made " - Franklin D Roosevelt .
As a general rule , the spacing of the notes on the TAB should tell you which notes are the long ones , and which are the short and fast ones , but obviously it wo n't tell you if a note is a triplet or anything like that .
An action is a pre-defined operation scoped to a specific portion of the cube .
The target of an action is the portion of the cube that the action applies to .
A vacuum is the cleanest thing imagineable .
A beard is the collection of hair that grows on the chin , upper lip , cheeks and neck of human beings and some non-human animals .
The building as a whole is a full product of the local style .
To my way of thinking , a journeyman is an accomplished smith .
A pandemic is a worldwide spread of a new and severe strain of influenza for which people have little or no immunity , and for which there will be no vaccine available for months .
In production , research , retail , and accounting , a cost is the value of money that has been used up to produce something , and hence is not available for use anymore ...
The only diagram of claying a forge that I have seen from a manufacturer was a shallow " ducks nest " built around the fire grate in a flat bottom forge .
Analysis of the pollution problem as a function of population density uncovers a not generally recognized principle of morality , namely : the morality of an act is a function of the state of the system at the time it is performed .
For me , one of the things that makes a farce a farce is a kind of humor-of-anticipation thing that comes from the audience knowing about the disguise , or the person hiding behind the door , or the fact that Bunbury does n't exist , etc. , when the characters do n't ( yet ) .
On the other hand , perhaps I 'm just asking for trouble , here-such an assembly is a Good Thing , certainly , and so what if we are using endure simply to mean that it has some lasting effect on its participants .
An ironworker is a much superior tool for everything you want to do - shearing round , square , flat bar and angle to length , and punching holes in all kinds of things .
The temporal identity of a thing is a relative identity , pointing beyond and above itself to the inter-modal meaning-coherence of time and the radical unity of meaning in the central religious sphere of our experiential horizon ( NC III , 67 ) .
Qualified by the whole Dooyeweerd says that questions as to whether an organ is an independent thing cannot be answered without the foundation of an idea of individuality structures .
An anchor is a device normally made of metal , that is used to connect a vessel to the bed of a body of water to prevent the craft from drifting due to wind or current ...
I do * not * intend to have those confiscated :) The reasoning behind the question was as follows : I 'm going to be making a fair number of blowpipes pretty soon , and one of the common failure modes on a blowpipe is the weld between the stainless head and the stainless or mild steel body separating .
Disposable commodity products can safely be bought anywhere , but one of the most important things you buy when you buy a welder is a long term relationship with knowlegeable people .
Having a name is an integral part of establishing an identity ; just think how effective Mary Martha has been over the years , in part because they have a clear purpose but also because they have a clear identity that they have strongly linked to that purpose .
The profitability of a country is a function of revenues ( mainly taxes ) and expenditure ( services and servicing loans ) .
A template is a page that contains embedded instructions concerning typeface and size , page layout and style features .
" Taking a car is an easy experience as driving is on same side of road , signs are in English and the wee lanes and narrow streets through the character villages are definitely best experienced from the road .
Cookies A cookie is a piece of data stored on the user 's computer tied to information about the user .
SOUL ll SOUL A Dream 's A Dream 24 .
The common distinction is whether an experiment is both designed and managed by the research team , or researcher-designed and farmer-managed or , to some extent , farmer-designed as well as farmer-managed .
Ken Morrisey 's 10 cc record for a plane is a shade over 214 mph while the 10 cc car record is 212 mph .
Across the road and just down a bit was a bungalow which belonged to the pit Manager its the last dwelling place in Bream and it 's here our journey ends at Bowson Road ..
Researching prices and devising a budget is the key to making sure your home project is ...
Lack of information about the duration of a lease is the one factor it is impossible to get round .
A councillor is a member of the council and is normally elected for a term of four years .
by Brian Murphy Chicago Firefighter from Chicago , Cal Picha , just recently becoming a default bachelor ( his old lady left him ) learns that in Costa Rica , another day in paradise and a sunburn is the last of his worries after he winds up with a package being sought by seriously insane and homicidal Russian gangsters .
A final , general point concerning liferents , of which registration officers should be aware , is that although the usual duration of a liferent is the lifetime of the liferenter , a liferent can be created for any fixed or uncertain period .
Where a case is a TP or a TA type , the authorisation column is always blank .
Mark This turns a selected point or points into marks , a mark being a construction element .
Point This turns a selected mark or marks into points , a point being a detail .
This solution , in Kirby J 's view , could be traced back to religious or social views resting on specific attitudes to the dignity of the human person - or , in shorthand , to the assumption that the birth of a child is an inalienable blessing ; 52 to hold otherwise strikes at the foundations of family life and , hence , society .
The notion that in every case , and for all purposes , the birth of a child is a ' blessing ' represents a fiction which the law should not apply to a particular case without objective evidence that bears it out ( at para 148 ) .
The birth of a child is a foreseeable consequence of a negligent management of an operation designed to sterilise a patient and the consequent costs of maintaining that child are not only equally foreseeable but cannot be avoided by dint of statute law - and there is nothing novel in recompensing consequential damage .
It 's one thing to testify against an amateur locked away in jail , but ratting out an organization is a completely different matter .
A router is a bit like a telephone exchange , passing data between the server and client PCs , and this applies to both wired and wireless systems .
But the extent of the human intentionality embodied by a tool is the tool 's existence , not the tools uses , which may be multiple .
I remember a time ( he wistfully notes ) when you used to have to wait and see if a film was both good and commercially successful before you started cracking on with sequels .
Poetry is primarily meant to be heard , so placing it before an audience is the ultimate test and home for the work .
It does n't matter where you 're working in the world a recording studio is a recording studio and a stage is a stage .
Recruiting an apprentice is the perfect solution to this as it is more affordable but also the company gets the opportunity to train the apprentice in the skills they need to help make their business grow .
For many , picking a rug is an after-thought .
I did n't really have a specific setting / subject when I wrote it but the idea of sitting on a train and talking to a stranger is a good one .
I 'm not sure the return to Cheltenham will make any difference , a fence is a fence at the end of the day .
Budget spending tends to be partitioned from the rest of the world-I am speaking as an accountant-and is a creature that not many people want to talk about .
A budget is a statement of expected expenditure or income that has been allocated under a set of headings , for a set period of time .
Starting a business is a complicated and demanding activity which can often overwhelm first timers .
Start with column 1 of blocks ( a block is a group of 9 cells ) and check for the existence of a particular number ( I 'm cheating on my rule of only writting down pair possibilities to show you what 's happening by putting the little 1 's in the top block ) .
" Representing Britain and H & F and standing on a podium with a medal is an unbelievable feeling , " he said .
More of a problem is the writing .
Already having a child is a very good indication that all is well in the sperm department .
Please note , you do not need the copyright holder 's permission if you are only singing the hymns , since a wedding is a private function .
When choosing your hymns , bear in mind the instrumental accompaniment available - some hymns that work perfectly well on an organ are a real struggle for a guitar ( and vice versa ) !
Whether you 're planning to sell online or simply advertise and market your business , having a website is an important step for business .
I personally found that the period between the third month of living in a new country and a year is the most difficult part .
In other words a drawing is the product of the intentional activity of a person ( an artist ) using a drawing medium , whereas a photograph is the causally explicable effect of light falling on a light-sensitive medium .
A cookie is a very small text file that occasionally gets placed on your PC or web browsing device that stores a very small amount of information .
Another legal requirement placed on a business is the proper use , control and storage of data and abiding by the 8 principals of data protection laid out by the Data Protection Act 1998 .
The other views you express including that an UCIS is just a vehicle to get round FSA requirements and that to generate a return you need to take a risk are the very views that have landed several of my IFA clients in FSA investigations which will result in their losing all of their permissions , be fined enormous sums , and be branded on the FSA website as lacking integrity .
An olive is a circular brass fitting thicker in the centre of its width than at the edges .
A sommelier is a trained and knowledgeable wine expert , who works in restaurants and wine bars .
A sommelier is a trained and knowledgeable wine expert , who is involved with all aspects of wine service .
Also a misstep is the power behind their predicament .
Many people wondering about how to form a company are under the mistaken impression that starting a company is a costly undertaking .
In the summer of 1987 rumours began spreading through this little group of journalists that Wallace 's claims to have been a sky-diver were a fake .
gazzap , a goal is a goal is a goal is a goal .
A pastorate is a fantastic place for individuals to discover and develop gifts and abilities in a friendly setting .
The next generation did n't experience the simplicity of those halcyon days when a spud was a spud ; to them the early 1980 s was THE time of adventure and discovery .
The analogy between a map and a theory is a useful device .
A prompt-book was a transcript of the play used during performances , cluttered with stage directions , instructions for sound effects , and the names of the actors .
A candle is a commonplace enough object ; in itself it is not a poetical thing ; it is something useful , something with regard to which the idea of use and ownership naturally arises ; it stands low down , as an inanimate thing , on the scale of images which culminates in man .
Thus , the keys to a successful email after shipping an order are the following .
I 'm totally on board with setting limits and making plans and implementing as many ideas from this as possible , but to act like you have total control over this when not an entrepreneur is a real stretch .
Remember , " The true mark of a Civilization is the way it treats it 's young and old " .
I do n't doubt that somebody once said that the true mark of a civilization is the way it treats its young and old , but I reserve the right to disagree with that person and that sentiment .
In the humanities you can either avoid drawing any definite conclusions e.g. conclude that an issue is a complex one ) , or draw conclusions so narrow that no one cares enough to disagree with you .
Should a war be the result of the precarious situation of European affairs , and all the unruly passions attending it be let loose on the ocean , our escape from insults and depredations , not only on that element , but every part of the other bordering on it , will be truly miraculous .
" A writer is a prince !
This decision is an important victory underscoring the fact that such a display is an acknowledgement of history , not an endorsement of religion .
Consider the notion that a miracle is a violation of the laws of nature .
I ca n't recall an instance were a journalist ever mentioned that melt predictions and sea level rise predictions were based on Antarctic models that were in essence WAGs and ultimately wrong ( Colbert would probably say these models were a good example of truthiness ) .
To be a denier is a good way of getting attention .
An e-Transcript is a digitally signed PDF sent on behalf of Brown University through the National Student Clearinghouse 's secure server .
Thus , are they implying a misdemeanor is a high crime ?
A lens is a graphical interface for a particular task .
Instead of having to designate in your schema that a field is a multi-value field , in Amazon CloudSearch any field can contain multiple values .
A wedding is a good example .
Reading Lifeline said that the quote about a baby being a gift is , " concerning and does show a disappointing absence of impartiality .
But it cannot be a true inference , that because the admission of an alien is a favour , the favour may be revoked at pleasure .
Adverbs frequently end in - ly ; however , many words and phrases not ending in - ly serve an adverbial function and an - ly ending is not a guarantee that a word is an adverb .
The wetted perimeter for a channel is the total perimeter of all channel walls that are in contact with the flow .
A phobia is a twisting of the normal fear response .
An uncrossing is a method of removing crossed conditions , which could mean anything from an actual curse someone has put on you , to a run of bad luck , to a destructive behaviour pattern .
Adding a blog is a great step , however there are many other ways such as creating white papers and thought pieces , or even simply aggregating content that exists elsewhere into a useful format .
A muon is a negatively-charged particle somewhat like an electron .
A tetrapod is any vertebrate ( an animal with a backbone ) which has 4 legs ( could be a bird , reptile , amphibian or a mammal ) .
And she senses that being a sitter is a subservient job .
It 's impolite to pry into someone 's racial background-whether that a person is a stranger , classmate or coworker .
An example is the use of a hail cannon , which uses a powerful supersonic shockwave to break up the hail formation process in the clouds .
An earthquake is a sudden movement of the Earth , caused by the abrupt release of strain that has accumulated over a long time .
An earthquake is the vibration , sometimes violent , of the Earth 's surface that follows a release of energy in the Earth 's crust .
A fault is a fracture in the Earth 's crust along which two blocks of the crust have slipped with respect to each other .
The focal depth of an earthquake is the depth from the Earth 's surface to the region where an earthquake 's energy originates ( the focus ) .
The epicenter of an earthquake is the point on the Earth 's surface directly above the focus .
The moment magnitude of an earthquake is a measure of the amount of energy released - an amount that can be estimated from seismograph readings .
But as Gramsci once said , the history of a party is the history of a nation , in monographic form .
A phone can do so many things and it keeps me connected to the whole world while at the same time being small enough to disappear in my pocket when I do n't want to notice it , and a laptop is the smallest portable device with a decent sized keyboard and screen that is not too fidgety to work on .
In fact , the definitions of acidification terms-acidity , H + , pH - are interlinked : acidity describes how many H+ ions are in a solution ; an acid is a substance that releases H+ ions ; and pH is the scale used to measure the concentration of H+ ions .
someone sent me an e-mail the other day that explained how a thug was a peon of a mobster .
For me , a monograph is a book intended for specialists that has no significant course-adoption potential at the undergrad level , and that about 200 libraries will buy .
A typo is an inadvertent slip on the keyboard .
A typo is an honest mistake .
" To which the retort is given : " Well , if I am drunk ( hic ) I shall be sober to-morrow morning ( hic ) , but a fool is a fool ( hic ) through all his life .
The relevant description ... captures necessary properties of the referent which are knowable a priori , as in the case of knowing that a bachelor is an unmarried man .
a instruction is the speculative load .
Becoming a contributor is an easy way to advance many of these forward ( well , easy if you have C++ skills already ) .
Election as a fellow is an honor bestowed upon new AAAS members by their peers , who nominate fellows for election by the AAAS Council , the association 's policymaking body .
This first approach to thermonuclear weapons , called the " Sloika " or " layer cake " ( a sloika is a cheap layered pastry somewhat like a napoleon ) , was originated by Sakharov and Ginzburg .
For example , the cross & hashtagblank of a wing is an airfoil .
The first event for which we made a prediction was the bombing of the American embassies in Africa on the 8th of August .
We know that a website is the real address of a business firm that highlights its services and products in front of the public .
uriblank An how are these " unfeatures " ( removal of features ) decided in the first place ?
The thought that trading or selling a book is the same as pirating software is ridiculous .
It seems to me like a sexist trifle , representative of the attitudes that a woman 's sobriety and self-control are obstacles to her sexuality , that getting with a lady is a ) a prize and b ) a matter of skillful manipulation , and that date-rapey behavior is necessary for men to succeed sexually .
However , I 'm also STILL not sure whether or not Jim feels that teaching people that a crime is a crime is at all a useful measure IN ADDITION to protecting onself against the people for whom no amount of such teaching will work .
Lenora Rose @ 145 : " However , I 'm also STILL not sure whether or not Jim feels that teaching people that a crime is a crime is at all a useful measure IN ADDITION to protecting oneself against the people for whom no amount of such teaching will work .
I feel that teaching people that a crime is a crime no matter where no matter when is absolutely a right and proper and necessary thing to do .
TELL : If one descends down under from our heights , And always deeper climbs , along the streams , Arrives one in a giant , level land , Where forest waters no more roaring foam , The rivers run in leisure and in peace , There sees one freely all of heaven 's spaces , The grain grows there in lengthy , beauteous pastures , And like a garden is the land to see .
The exact nature of the " constituent " elements of the self which , while slowly dissolving , are available for temporary revivification by a medium is a matter of no doubt , so far as Eastern wisdom is concerned , but difficult to explain in Western terminology .
When you are tall , traveling on an airplane is a hassle .
Over on the left you see a stack and what we mean by a stack is a bunch of membrane electro assemblies put together and then literally tie rodded into each other to make the power .
Because an interview is a process of evaluating you , and because you rarely know the attitudes of an interviewer ahead of time , you do run the risk of encountering someone whom might evaluate you negatively ( consciously or unconsciously ) , regardless of company policies .
A womb is a dark place and no one knows what will come out of it .
A finding is a statement of fact relating the information that the commission has considered to the decision that it has made .
Born in New Jersey some 40 years ago , Dale was raised in Kentucky , where he spent most of his life , graduating from the University of Kentucky with a degree Be the first to add your comment , or ask a question .
The requirements in both instances include a finding , by a Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court judge in the former case and the Attorney General in the latter instance , that on the basis of the facts submitted there is probable cause to support a finding that an individual is an agent of a foreign power .
We as a tribe are the guardians of the headwaters of both these rivers and see our responsibilities as kaitiaki a very serious responsibility .
and a sarpanch is the head of this group .
A mortgage is a big deal to someone like me who is in it on their own .
A name is a very important part of life to a Lakota man or woman .
And , of course , the first time you got to see the Wolfman and Frankenstein in a showdown was a thrill .
While I as a person am a writer , what I write and who I am are distinctly different things .
Communal space , concessions , workout and sparring areas and a courtyard are all part of Maldonado 's design , which is adorned with red neon .
An assart was a piece of land enclosed and won from the forest 3 .
Additionally they offer a 12 telescopic pin tumbler system , available in both polished Chrome and Brass , comes with three Keys as standard and available as an option is a master keyed system if required .
a car is a car is a car ... just some look and feel different ... get over the speedbump of the language and learn from it ... ooof that was a bad analogy ...
A smile is the first thing they notice about the opposite sex .
^ 1336608000 ^ 5094 ^ Sort teeth before dating , survey sa ... ^ A smile is the first thing they notice about the opposite sex .
I think that it is safe to conclude from IBM 's sales figures that a fair proportion of businesses are analysing the performance metrics of x 86 , RISC , etc. and are deciding that a mainframe is the way ahead .
The capital structure of a company is the particular combination of debt , equity and other sources of finance that it uses to fund its long term financing .
The f number of a lens is the ratio of the focal length to the effective object lens diameter .
Entering an event is a great way to set a goal and a focus .
Additionally , of course , it involves the politics of selection : as one recent editor observed , ' There is no avoiding the fact that making an anthology is an act of criticism ' ( Lucie Smith 1985 ) .
An exception is the glide plane , which combines a reflection with a translation of the reflected object by half a unit cell vector parallel to the glide axis .
( but I-I-I will always etc. .. ) ; noblesse oblige or onanistic delusion ( maybe these are always the same thing ) , but what is n't a delusion is the utter rejection and obliteration of a human-scale possibility , in the name of ... well , gimme some truth , as a disenchanted utopian once said .
If a childhood is uninspiring and difficult , then bad behaviour as a child and an adult is the result .
A commodity is a product that is completely undifferentiated .
Link In computing , a hyperlink is a reference , link , or navigation element in a document to another place , such as another section of the same document or to another document that may be on or part of a ( different ) domain .
Portrait A portrait is a painting , photograph , sculpture , or other artistic representation of a person , in which the face and its expression is predominant .
A further reason for such a duty is the danger , in the coming years , of health services being fragmented with a resulting lack of continuity of care , which has already led to a breakdown of communication in some cases and it is a danger that only a properly regulated duty can address .
Questionnaires A questionnaire is a straightforward way of getting information from lots of people .
By far the biggest difference between a spread bet and a CFD is the tax treatment .
The only problem is that even when polished a turd is a turd .
darkknight wrote : even when polished a turd is a turd .
" One of the barriers to implementing a dashboard is the fear factor .
Vastly improved web based technology means that rolling out a performance dashboard across an enterprise is a realistic goal but to the untutored eye the slickness of the technology makes delivery look deceptively easy .
The C++ term for the a routine in a class is a member function ( the general OO term would be method ) ; and for the variable a data member ( the general OO term would be instance variable , because each instance of the class will have its own personal variable ) .
What does vary a lot is the quality of information you get to see about each property .
Once you put your eggs in a 15 - year basket with Kovalchuk , turning on a dime is a little difficult to be sure , especially when there is little time to adjust .
His ability as a passer is an underrated part of his game that will help him transition well to the pros .
Discussing this sort of stuff can be a bit of a headache-there 's a lot of stigma about the sort of people who gravitate toward the lifestyle , even though love is not a finite resource .
Now , to be sure , interpreting a text is a form of making an argument , requires posing problems of a particular sort , and requires the evaluation of other interpretations ( other arguments ) .
All photos by KRCBAs part of the loosely scheduled activities at Monday 's Move to Amend rally in Santa Rosa 's Old Courthouse Square , Abraham Entin led the group that had gathered in a light-hearted call and response on the theme , " I 'll believe a corporation is a person when ...
Creating an image of a table is a bad idea because it 's very difficult for others to edit .
An internship is a great , low pressure way to do just that .
2 ) However , you appear to be using " model " to refer also to the whole kit and kaboodle that MacCormick is proposing for evaulating teachers , of which only a part is the Value Added Model .
If you studied algebra , you 'll remember that a monoid is an associative operation with a left and right identity .
All the other data as a sniper is the easy part to take care .
[ An alternative is a " non-permanent " environment variable - set the variable from the widows command prompt ( start > run > cmd or start > programs > accessories > Command Prompt ) , type SET MOZ_CONDUIT_LOG = c :\ temp \ cond uit.log and then start Thunderbird from that window .
Such an exclusion is the equivalent of the death penalty .
A classic was the 1784 Westminster election in which supporters of the prime minister , William Pitt , backed by the palace , organised to oppose the return of star Whig politician , Charles James Fox , in the seat with the widest popular franchise in Great Britain .
Whether or not you decide to hire an attorney is a personal decision .
If Alabama pays anywhere near as crappily as the state government that I worked for previously ( many of the caseworkers were eligible for the same benefits for which they were evaluating people ) , $ 25 a month is a huge freaking deal .
As defined by the industry , a port is an external opening on a valve body .
Running a race is a great way of improving your health / fitness and self-confidence .
Choosing a puppy is an exciting , emotional experience for children .
The opposite of a scientist is a religious , authoritarian , political conservative , because they tend to have a strong need to never modify their deeply held beliefs , or to ever appear to be uncertain and indecisive .
Since an MTA is a type of contract between institutions , there is legal recourse if it is broken .
We recognize the need to avoid burdening researchers unnecessarily with administrative work , but we think that verifying the qualifications of a recipient and reviewing a protocol is a reasonable burden .
You begin to remember how when you were young rolling in the grass with a dog was the most incredible fun .
Accepting that I was no longer a Muslim was an extremely difficult thing to do .
In 1974 , a second amendment broadened this to permit other languages to be taught or used as the language of instruction for part of the school day ; an example is the Ukrainian-English Bilingual Program established in Saskatoon in 1979 .
" A picture is the expression of an impression .
" A camel is a horse designed by committee .
An abstract is a summary of an academic paper or longer piece of work which sets out in a brief , cogent way an outline of what the reader can expect from the full work .
Writing an abstract is a professional skill which requires time , care and commitment to perfect .
An iron clad evidence of a cult is the acceptance of behavior in the cult context you would never permit or condone in any other context .
Law is not a substitute FOR morality -- there is no law forcing you to write a Thank You note to Aunt Velma for the homecanned peaches -- but if you operate from a set of moral values that tells you that showing gratitude for a gift is a good thing , then you will know right from wrong even if there is n't a Thank You Note Policeman looking over your shoulder .
As the philosopher Josef Pieper reminds us , loving a person is a way of saying , " It 's good that you exist ; it 's good that you are in the world !
An example is the Federal Reserve , which will be dismantled .
Bearing a child is the choice that heavily constrains a girl 's future opportunities .
You act like an abortion is some kind of liberating , introducing a girl to womanhood type of event .
" Bearing a child is the choice that heavily constrains a girl 's future opportunities .
While writing a summary is a familiar assignment from grade school , in college , summaries are no longer enough , and instructors will frequently require a response .
A sled is a sliding vehicle designed to transport passengers and / or cargo by using a running mechanism ...
The Old Testament contains an account of the Creation , and of the dealings of God with the human family from Adam to about 400 B.C. The promise of a messiah is a generally pervading theme .
A psychiatrist is a Medical Doctor [ M.D. ] with specialty training in psychiatry .
For example , even a redacted name of a person has been known to cover that a doc is a forgery [ the name found to be in different typeface in separately disovered , authentic copy of the " doc " .
An acorn is an oak A weed gives no fruit .
Requiring a ' cut-and-paste ' answer from a script is an example of a process driven by a textbook .
Unsigned , whether dated or not , an opinion is an " opinion " that can be relied upon .
Gertrude Stein notwithstanding , a rose is a rose is not a Snottgobble .
An example is the algorithm to find the solution to a quadratic equation , which most of us were taught while learning algebra .
For him , the adaptive features of an organism were the outcome of striving to cope with the environment .
" To lose someone in a murder is an awful thing .
The Spanish do not do sprouts or ' little cabbage ' as they call them so a bowlful is a must ' on my touch down at the Airport .
Q 14 A balalaika is a triangular-shaped musical instrument associated with which country ?
Such an argument is the same as sayuing that you should be able to publish anything you want in any newspaper and no-one ( not even the owners of the paper ) can stop you .
The breakfast on a tray is an excellent idea and just what was needed after a long night celebrating .
A degree is a way of demonstrating a level of academic prowess .
A racist is a tribalist who will do all in their own mind / power to keep their own race pure and away from any kind of " foreign " intervention ...
A tax is an involuntary fee ; someone playing a bandit has a choice .
In order to do this they have to come up with ' proof ' statistics and the only statistics that are easily quantifiable , and which are capable of being put on a spreadsheet are those of exam passes .
Taking a shower was an ordeal with poor water pressure , tiny towels and a cold bathroom .
Having a properly enclosed and ventilated smoking room in an establishment is a good idea ( and means you do n't have hordes of people smoking round the doors ) , but so many places just have an ' area ' within the space which is often useless .
Obviously we can only do that a week in arrears each time ( and a week 's a long time in pensions these days ) , but you may want to read it all anyway .
A stall is a reduction in the lift coefficient generated by an aerofoil as the angle of attack increases .
To ensure that a tenancy is a short assured tenancy you must , prior to the signing of the lease by the tenants , serve a Form AT 5 on them in the prescribed form .
" An indulgence is a remission before God of the temporal punishment due to sins whose guilt has already been forgiven , which the faithful Christian who is duly disposed gains under certain prescribed conditions through the action of the Church which , as the minister of redemption , dispenses and applies with authority the treasury of the satisfactions of Christ and the saints .
Dropping his gloves for a punch-up is a speciality .
The title of a document is the first paragraph of the document , ending in one or more blank lines .
A class is a set of objects which share the same underlying implementation , and the idea of object class is distinct from that of type , which is a property of interfaces rather than objects .
The model followed is that of [ Saltzer 79 ] : a name is a textual string , a binding is an association of a name with some value , and a context is a collection of bindings .
Resolving a name is the process of locating the value bound to it .
But like you said , a duck is a duck , an assclown is an assclown .
A year is a long time to have out of the game at such a long age .
But a win is a win and although they have beaten us to the trophy as the first London club to win it , it was only a matter of time .
A fiambrera is the Spanish word for lunchbox : the group adopted the name after frequenting gallery openings and finding that they could fill up their fiambreras with food for the week .
An oscillator is a ring of points connected by delta arcs or arcs that are satisfied by a common setting of the input terminals .
One of the joys of flying rather than merely visiting an airport is the chance to see other aircraft on the ground close-up , and on this occasion D-ILKA queued behind G-TEKK , the Tecnam P 2006 T described in the 2012 Gloucestershire Airport Charity Open Day article , to use Staverton 's 1419 metre long Runway 27 .
The " hand of God " emerging from a cloud is a graphical cliche of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries .
In British analytical philosophy , a frequently used figure for an object is the chair or table .
Again , it can be done using Scrum or other processes , but I have found that following a plan is a stress-reliever .
Baroness Neville-Jones : My Lords , I am aware that this figure of a fortnight has got around to being perceived as some sort of deadline , whereas a fortnight is the absolute minimum period that the families are given to consider voluntary return .
Everything 's a Pound is a balanced mixture of artists ' books produced specifically for the project and existing publications which happen to weigh a pound or have been chopped down to size .
Aggression - How combative a player is A high attribute means an energetic and forceful player .
An annuity is a true insurance product , whereas the savings phase does n't have to have anything to do with insurance products .
Shortly after Cronert published details of the fragments of papyri relating to Dionysodorus which had been found at Herculaneum , Schmidt published a commentary on the material in which he argued convincingly that the Dionysodorus who solved the cubic equation using the intersection of a parabola and a hyperbola was the Dionysodorus of Caunus referred to in the Herculaneum papyrus .
The room at the hotel was nice and large with a sitting room and kitchen but the £ 1 per person per day for a kettle was a bit steep .
IAM and RoSPA passes could still be worth a few quid off insurance , but from our experience the only insurers that offered a discount were the ones with ridiculously high premiums in the first place , so perhaps a reduction in VED might be better .
McClurkin believes that what makes the show a hit is the fact that this reality talent quest is not what anyone expected .
Gourlay said the reason the young players did n't get a chance is the position we were in .
An example is the drink-drive law .
I can see your point , but I do n't think that driving without a license is a purely technical violation .
According to Masunda , who is also a lawyer , all that is required in order to have a rally is a clearance letter from the police and not a police permission The police have on many occasions denied the MDC permission to hold rallies , while Zanu ( PF ) has no such restrictions .
The particular claim under consideration was a total cost claim : " The logic of such a claim is this : the contractor might reasonably have expected to perform the work for a particular sum , usually the contract price ; the proprietor committed breaches of contract ; the actual reasonable cost of the work was a sum greater than the expected cost .
" Look , I 'm very old school about this kind of thing - a win is a win , " Watson replied , " we have n't set any targets and all that we want is to get Lucy to win .
' Oh , yes , I should tell you , we now use the term " holotech " rather than " nanotech " , because what this harnessed wildness consists of is a holarchy of holons - a holarchy being a hierarchy without the power from the top .
A holon is an entity which is simultaneously a whole , with its particular capabilities , and a part of one or more other holons .
Selling outside the above dates without a licence is a criminal offence .
* * AV writes : I thought a derby was a shape-shifting game that if you win it gives you bragging rights across a region and makes you undisputed top dogs but if you lose it does n't matter because it just another match really .
Two feedings a day is an acceptable practice .
I should say four-and - sixpence a week is the average rent for these tumble-down and truly repulsive apartments .
> > I used the analogy of a golf course : a bunker is a hazard , and > your ball landing in it is a " hazardous event " .
> > > The word " thing " refers > > normally to an object ; if it is taken here so to refer , then he and > > Pete M disagree , because conditions are not objects and Pete > M thinks > > a hazard is a condition .
The larger and taller a woman is the more suited do these prints are on her appearance .
The test of whether a person is a lodger , as opposed to a sub-tenant , must be determined by the degree of control retained by the householder over the rooms which the lodger occupies .
Cloning a car is the vehicle equivalent of identity theft .
In public family law , he said , the key lines of enquiry were less but arguably more complex in themselves and expressed the view that the levels of hostility , akin to a battleground was an issue that needed to be looked at and to consider whether there were any real differences between an adversarial and inquisitorial process and how much our current system took from each , if at all .
Scotland has many fishing communities but those of the East Neuk ( a neuk is a corner ) of Fife are very appealing .
A monastery is a controlled environment where this sort of emotional noise is kept to a minimum .
I believe the proper understanding of ' how ' and ' why ' you play a game are the most important regards to consider when thinking of sports in a socialist society .
Weaving can be done with a variety of materials , reeds , grasses , woods , fabric and a course is a very good way to get started .
" A book which is left on a shelf for a decade is a dead thing , but it is also a chrysalis , packed with the potential to burst into new life .
A visit is a must !
Cooking a cheesecake is a little like cooking scrambled eggs , as the line between creamy and curdled is fine .
As you say , they were dogs in need , a rescue is a rescue , wherever they are from .
Planting a garden is a way of keeping the harsh realities of the world at bay .
An exclusion is an accusation of guilt .
Thaumatrope A thaumatrope is a toy that was popular in Victorian times .
Thaumatrope A thaumatrope is a card or disc with two different figures drawn one each side .
Do make sure a partnership is the best option for you - a limited company is another which may be appropriate .
Imagesetter An imagesetter is an ultra-high resolution large-format computer output device .
Phone interaction and eating of any kind during a performance is an absolute sin , especially if you 're in the front few rows - I 've seen people sat so close to the action they could reach out and touch the actors rustling away with a bag of mints like they 're sat at the cinema .
Taking on a cat is a lifelong responsibility and the costs of veterinary treatment need to be considered before making this commitment .
Monotype [ disambiguation ] A monotype is a print made by drawing or painting on a smooth , non-absorbent surface .
In Oracle Database 10 g , an attribute is a column in a dimension that characterizes each element of a single level .
In Oracle Database 10 g , a dimension is a database object that defines hierarchical ( parent / child ) relationships between pairs of column sets .
In Oracle Express , a dimension is a database object that consists of a list of values .
For example , a dimension is an object , a mapping is a process , and both are elements .
By definition an organization is a " body of persons organized for some specific purpose , as a club , union , or society .
A path is a string that provides the location of a file or directory .
While such a group is the topic of all the Mavericks books , in volume three , attention is specifically focused on the 20th century pioneers of nutritional medicine .
In order to reduce a drawing where a foot is the unit , it is always best to use one-and-a-half inches , or twelve-eighths of an inch , as the basis .
We can argue if this budget is what it takes , but to present something that 's there to spice up the document as a chart is a sign of a pathological obsession .
A probe is a probe expression that may optionally call functions .
" A computer is one thing and marks on a paper are another .
Such a person is the enemy of Christ - he rejects both the Father and Son .
A large raw beef leg bone fed once a week is an excellent dietary addition and keeps your dogs teeth free of plaque and gum disease .
Agnosticism is the position that the existence of a god is unknowable and unprovable so an agnostic is some who neither believes in a god / gods nor has a lack of belief in the same .
There upon a shelf was the row of formidable scrap-books and books of reference which many of our fellow-citizens would have been so glad to burn .
Animation 23 : A gene is a discrete sequence of DNA nucleotides .
" I think we are having a limp-wristed sort of crawl out of a hole , but a recovery is a more robust word , " the one and only Steve Wynn said earlier this week .
An assault is an assault however motivated .
If your idea of a designer is a self-styled auteur or a sometime mystic who muse on their own creative processes , you could get this at TED .
A new feature or an effect is a great attraction , the curiosity playing his role .
The esteemed Gabriel Malor asks - If you think an hour a day is the right total and your partner thinks an hour a week is the right total , how much does he need to do to avoid the charge that he has n't done his share ?
An applet is a small program that is intended not to be run on its own , but rather to be embedded inside another application .
One of the most difficult jobs I have as a counselor is the task of getting people to confess their virtues - the things they are doing that they believe to be right , or scripturally grounded , but which are in fact all messed up .
A clade is a real thing .
Loss of a trait is a potential synapomorphy ( although there seems to be some scholarly debate on their value ) .
A sitter is an easy shot .
A cookie is a data element that our web site sends to your browser , and is stored on your computer .
Such an attitude was a primary ingredient in the incidents surrounding the THERAC -25 medical devices .
To Kellogg , taking a bath was an exciting religious experience because Kellogg knew that God was in the water and he would splash God-filled water all over himself .
A fractal is a geometrical or physical structure that has an irregular or fragmented shape at all scales of measurement between a greatest and a smallest scale such that certain mathematical or physical properties of the structure are greater than the spatial dimensions .
" A process is a program in execution .
The specific heat capacity of a material is a measure of the quantity of heat needed to raise a gram ( or given quantity ) of a material 1 oC .
What 's nice about a pension is the value can be computed $ 44,000 x 25 = $ 1.1 M. So that military pension is worth about $ 1.1 M in the bank .
An operad is an universal device which encodes multiple inputs operations and all the ways of composing them .
Making a plan is a relatively straightforward exercise now .
StyleNames are used for identifying Style environments , a StyleAttribute is a String specifying how a value is to be mapped to a query .
A university is a complex environment and many valuable activities take place outside the priority areas .
> To explain anionic and cationic ... an ion is a molecule with an electric charge .
The formal definition of a reef is a ridge of rock or shingle or sand at or just below the surface of the water .
How can a man be so blind to see a wreck is the only way .
We are firm believers that a dog is a lifetime commitment .
A coalition is a cooperative effort to address a problem and the same is true for the recognition .
The general goal of a coalition is the positive change in people and programs .
A non-paper is a document that is so confidential that it does n't really exist .
BEST IN SHOW ( 2000 ) A human is a dog 's best friend .
In fact , a fly is the most impertinent and indelicate thing in creation , -- the very type and moral of human spirits whom one occasionally meets with , and who perhaps , after an existence troublesome and vexatious to all with whom they come in contact , have been doomed to reappear in this congenial shape .
Though one of the oldest and in a historical point of view one of the most important towns in the State , the only settlement within its limits at all approaching the dignity of a village is a small cluster of houses in the northeastern part of the town , and known as " The Corners .
That does not mean that anyone who visited a Mujahideen camp or gave a lecture was a member of the group or agreed with their ideology .
A label is a fixed characteristic of a player , such as sex or skin color , which can be observed by the other player .
The most successful example of such a policy is the Federal Reserve System itself .
Two dollars a week was the highest charge for table-board , and most of the students paid but a dollar and a half .
And slightly further a field is the UNESCO World Heritage site of Saltaire and the town of Ilkley - known for offering some of Yorkshire 's most beautiful countryside and best eateries .
If nothing else , removing a lift pass for half a day is a sensible punishment as well as doing some good to educate people who probably have n't ever been taught the code of conduct stuff .
A victory for just treatment of a minority is a victory for us all .
Once upon a time the small circle of a village was the boundary of life and understanding ... that village now encompasses the globe , it 's global .
An enforcement from a party machine regardless of declared policy prior to an election is a dictate , not democracy , hence my reference to Dictatorship .
A plot is a bonus .
The point is that a fridge is a stable environment , and a reasonable place to compare skis .
I can do what I want when building a site from scratch but re-jigging a freebie is a bit of a pain .
After extensive public consultation and research , the Tate St Ives Phase Two partners concluded in October 2007 that an extension was the only way to deliver aims which unite our commitment to an innovative exhibition programme , better engagement with artists , young people , families and the wider community , and support for the development of a knowledge economy in Cornwall .
An example is the relative price of resin-bound solutions in comparison with exposed aggregate .
Could the idea of a god be an evolutionary adaptation ?
HI could anyone help me with my problem , have been breeding budgies for a few years and have never come across this problem before , I have a second clutch from a pair were the flight feathers of the younge are missing , will theyu grow back ?
But moving from a life in IT headhunting to running a farm is a gamble , a fact the owners of a new venture to breed an unusual type of animal in Wokingham know all too well .
Q. I think a blog is a great way to update members and keep them informed .
If a person is a believer on the right track , I try to answer the questions they ask as fully as possible and wean them away from any incorrect positions they may be espousing .
If a person is a believer but someone is spiritual trouble for whatever reason , I try to give them straightforward guidance about turning away from the bad and turning toward the good , and I try to encourage them to do so ( rather than trying to solve all problems in a single email ) .
A category of objects is a class ; an object is a single instance of a class .
The only other character allowed in a name is the underscore ( ' _ ' ) .
A pointer is a value that represents ( " points to " ) a location in the physical memory of the computer .
Although finding a cure for HIV is currently a dream , the recent substantial increase in funding towards HIV cure research , our progress in understanding latency , as well as the establishment of large international consortia with participation of pharma is likely to lead to a cure being a reality - at least for some patients - in coming years .
Those who " needed " a brochure had rarely performed the due diligence to determine that a brochure was the most effective means of accomplishing their goals .
Telling , reading , and role-playing a story are some useful classroom activities for teaching moral values in schools .
Child labor is one of the sad issues and the biggest challenges that the whole world is facing , where a child is an earning machine working to satisfy the needs of his / her family .
I 'm pretty sure a pinto is any horse that is colored like a paint , but is n't a paint .
However , if a person is an unbeliever , and if it turns out that only a financial collapse will get his / her attention , and if God allows such a collapse to happen and the result is that the person turns to Jesus and is saved whereas if such had not occurred he / she would have put off coming to Him until it was too late , in what sense then is that instance of going broke " bad " ?
A win 's a win .
Setting up a business is a demonstration that you recognise the industry is changing , and want to help it survive .
For Brown to promise cancer tst results within a week is a nonsense as if more than one test is required no way can this happen .
Working with a team is a challenging task .
Something that all the comment here miss out ( or do not make clear ) is that an embryo is a human life .
An embryo is the beginning of life - surely that counts for something .
An example is the development of Bt brassicas ( cabbages ) which are resistant to a major pest , the diamond back moth .
A woofer is a bass speaker .
Basically the whole thing about being a franchise is the fact that you have a brand to sell .
" I suppose it proves that a week is a long time in politics , and that perceptions of leaders can change depending on the political events that surround them at any given moment of time .
Social , cultural , commercial and political integration have created dramatic changes in all aspects of our life For many americans with problem credit , the thought of buying a car is a daunting one Jun payday loan lenders online loading payday loan lenders online read more download stuart little dvd film djr payday loan website .
But if you assume that a clock is a clock , and that performance scales with the addition of CPU cores and faster clocks , then the new Sparc T 3 machines offered substantially better bang for the buck that their Sparc T 2 and T 2 + predecessors .
Don t rely excessively on appraisals an appraisal is a valuation of a property by an independent appraiser .
Survey method that this research tends to see as a possibility is a structured questionnaire .
Such a concept is a value added tool in enhancing the economic value of the business enterprises involved in the industry survey conducted as part of the research work .
As understood like this , a demon is a ' spiritual being , power , or principle , that mediates between the transcendent and the temporal realm ' - between Heaven and Hell on the one hand , and Earth on the other .
Singing on both sides of a fence is a welcome contribution towards raising the morale of all those concerned .
The significance of color in this case is extremely arbitrary , for instance , just because a food is a certain color does not mean it tastes a certain way or is given a fixed significance .
A constructor is the routine , which is called as soon as a new object is instantiated and before the object has a prototype assigned to it .
The final element for us to put together before we can call it an end is the score object .
Third , often the only information available to a judge is the word of the applicant without corroborating evidence , so fraudulent claims are easily made by those motivated to make them .
" And also Dudley Parker of Eastleigh , Hants , England who wrote : " It is no more the animal 's creation than a cloud is an act of God .
A counterpoint is the sentimental Russian tune that accompanies Olga throughout some of the film 's most moving scenes .
A fish is an animal , its flesh is meat .
16 - What an objection is this !
A bastard being the descendant only of such marriages as are subject to one of the capital punishments that are carried out under the jurisdiction of a court .
A mix is a good thing .
Being a parent is a joy and a challenge .
A blog is the perfect complement to a landing page .
As with most things , successfully marketing an application is a combination of skill and luck .
Never thought there would be an advantage to this , but worrying about a flu is a luxury I would not consider indulging .-
A virus is another problem that could cause heart disorder .
Not creating effective documentation in that early stage of a product is a horrible mistake .
The presence of racism as a phenomenon in American society is adequately handled by the law , and all ' subtle ' racism that does n't rise to the level of a crime is a manifestation of sin , of evil .
A kulak was a peasant who had , say , two cows instead of one .
A conflict is a dispute between two or more contestants , neither of whom has the power ( though they may , and often do , have the desire ) to annihilate one of them .
Songs distort pronunciation , depending on whether a syllable is a 16th note or a half note , for instance .
So the DS 1307 is running severely out of spec and so you 're completely on your own regards timekeeping accuracy ( and a second a week is a very big ask of a DS 1307 when operating fully in spec - get hold of a copy of Maxim App Note 58 to see the care needed with crystal selection and circuit layout ) - and when Vcc disappears so does Vbat as well - so timekeeping is completely lost ?
When ( based on a discussion / description ) I decline to come out immediately I have recieved phone abuse ( twice ) which seem to start with " I pay may rates what sort of a service is this ...
a living is a living and he is just making a fair days money .
The last time I checked , a photo was a pretty safe way to identify a person so why not replace the bank logo hologram with a hologram of the card 's owner .
A drone is an exact genetic replica of the queen and therefore no fertilisation is required .
The other thing is the aircraft IS NOT ASTOR in this case its ISTAR see PPRUNE HERE ( uriblank ) an ISTAR being a Beechcraft King Air 350 ER ...
We would advise any prospective purchaser that a lease is a legal document , consequently , the terms and conditions contained therein should be checked by any buyers legal advisers prior to exchanging contracts to purchase .
A lease is a legal document , consequently , we would suggest that any prospective purchaser should discuss the terms & conditions contained within the lease with their solicitor prior to exchange of contracts .
There are many more options for leisure time open to todays children than there used to be , so if hanging around outside a shop is the only thing a group can find to do then they need to take a look at why .
" If a shed is a large , multi-functional building then I think this is an elegant shed , " he said .
Still a accident is a roll of the dice at best .
How do you know if an animal is a carrier or likely to become affected ?
the culture of an Irishman is an enterprise to be undertaken with a sort of moral bog hoe .
The writing of a melody is an emotional moment ; success does n't make it easy .
Current wording : [ # 6 ] When a value is stored in an object of structure or union type , including in a member object , the bytes of the object representation that correspond to any padding bytes take unspecified values .42 ) The values of padding bytes shall not affect whether the value of such an object is a trap representation .
Those bits of a structure or union object that are in the same byte as a bit-field member , but are not part of that member , shall similarly not affect whether the value of such an object is a trap representation .
Sonker - A sonker is a deep-dish pie or cobbler served in many flavors including strawberry , peach , sweet potato , and cherry .
Thus lawmaking is the task of the whole charge of the whole people ; for in all other matters direction toward an end is the function of him to whom the end belongs .
OCR for page 172 Realizing the Information Future : The Internet and Beyond Box 5.2 The Importance of Sharing A network is a shared resource .
" smack " " hulk " " buss " " cog " A smack was a small , single-masted boat , typically used for fishing or coastal transport .
A buss was a broad-beamed , two-masted , 50 -70 ton vessel , also used for fishing ( particularly herring ) .
A hulk was a larger vessel and the type of ship most commonly used for cargo transport in the Middle Ages .
A cog was another , smaller ( single-masted ) type of cargo vessel ; it had been the most common type until superseded by the hulk .
" hauberk " " haubergeon " A hauberk was a mail shirt that also extended to cover the legs ; this was the principal element of armour before plate was introduced .
A haubergeon was a shorter version .
For example , if a stand is a mixture of midtolerant e.g. , red oak - white ash ) and tolerant e.g. , sugar maple ) species , and occurs on a rich mesic site , any canopy gaps that occur through death of single trees are likely to be " captured " by tolerant species .
An end-grain is a much harder surface and has a greater tolerance for the chopping motion .
Another example of such a reaction is the recent , alleged , torture-unto-death of that unfortunate black man in Texas .
then there 's the issue of racism in places that never had that flag ( the northern ones ) and the hypocrisy there , like changing a flag is all it takes .
what a team were those huskers .
The stage of a cancer is the extent to which it has spread .
A biopsy is the most certain way to determine whether a breast lump is cancerous .
A biopsy is the removal of a small piece of tissue for examination in the laboratory .
An alternative is a regular work vice with the jaws lined with cloth or leather to protect the horn .
Upgrading to an SSD is a relatively quick and easy way to speed up everything your PC does , from booting into Windows to launching programs to opening photos .
A crown is a type of cap placed over a damaged tooth .
For the solo pianist , who performs on Friday , Aug 1 , at the National Music Foundation 's Berkshire Performing Arts Theatre in Lenox at 8 , selling his music as a product was a continuation of his previous career as a commercial jingle writer .
But the majority ruling nevertheless stands as a potential roadblock to anyone who would argue in court that the inability to use a computer is a substantial legal hindrance to living in the modern world .
Particularly in California , state laws make it much easier for injured employees to prove that an injury is a " limitation " on their work or life activities .
Entering a program is a little involved , but once you get your first program in , the rest becomes easier .
getting in the habit of always turning off the lights when leaving a room is a simple way to reduce electricity costs that only takes a split second to do .
An image is a likeness of the original with a certain difference , for it is not an exact reproduction of the original .
An image is a likeness and representation of some one , containing in itself the person who is imaged .
A son being the natural image of his father is somewhat different from him , for he is a son , not a father .
Yet an angel is a creature , and servant , and minister of God , not God .
An image is a name and likeness of him it represents .
In this brief review , she states , " Boycotting an iron is not for everyone , but investing in a steamer is a wise idea for fast wrinkle fixes for your favorite pieces .
Rather than a sound with power which riots , the sound effect that there is a settlement like which is a synthesizer is the feature .
A man is the aggregate of having experienced until now .
For a genre which it flows and is called alternative-rock , a time is the present which may be turning into the existence of a past inheritance .
But playing short scale makes my right hand in pain cause there is n't much space between strings , but playing with a pick is no problem .
One of my favorite toys as a youngster was the tiny gyroscopic self contained top called the Wizzer .
The age of a patient is a determining factor in administering anesthesia .
A common sign of a sty is a small , yellowish spot at the center of the bump that develops as pus expands in the area .
A chalazion is a tiny lump of the upper or lower eyelid caused by inflammation of a gland of the lid .
I think that it was Winston Churchill who , once said " A country without a conscience is a country without a soul , and a country without a soul is a country that cannot survive .
An important piece in helping him to identify as a male was the early mentoring from the concerned woman at Amityville Gospel Tabernacle .
Disclosures of fear should not be dismissed - for many people , seeking help from an agency is a last resort and therefore all disclosures should be taken seriously .
Spine or back pain Spine or the back of an individual is an extremely sensitive organ of each individual .
A truth-bearer is an entity that is said to be either true or false and nothing else .
A truthmaker for a truthbearer is that entity in virtue of which the truthbearer is true .
From zero to 30 mph , few things this side of an Italian exotic could keep up , and over that speed - like cruising on the freeway - all that 's necessary to make a pass is a quick mash of the accelerator .
A blog is a venue to share thoughts and ideas and discuss them with interested parties .
Possibly you can appreciate the fact that finding a father is a tremendous task when you have no idea where he lives , or what he looks like , or what name he may be using .
A bronchoscope is a thin , tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing .
A thoracoscope is a thin , tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing .
An endoscope is a thin , tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing .
A mediastinoscope is a thin , tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing .
Our boss will have a fit is this girls leaves before June at the earliest .
Per encoding / decoding now works correctly for single value subtyping of an integer type where a subtype is a predefined value .
A cookie is a small data file that is placed on the hard drive of your computer when you visit a website .
Copying data from the BSAF database to a spreadsheet is an easy process , but it takes several steps .
The vaporiser only heats up and eliminates 99 % of the carcinogenic substances , so using a vaporiser is the safest possible way .
" In a country were an individual could no longer protect himself , he cannot protect his family ; a family who cannot protect its members , cannot protect the community where they belong ; and a person , a family and a community that cannot protect itself cannot protect a nation .
The Supreme Court of Virginia granted deference to the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality 's ( " DEQ " ) interpretation of its regulations in upholding the agency 's determination that a facility was an MRF rather than a recycling center and that it therefore required a permit under the regulations .
A comedy was a story that ended well , with the hero and heroine receiving everything they should receive .
" [ 174 ] For the suddenly unemployed , " a layoff is an emotional blow from which very few fully recover . .
Is Junta , the lone and wild mountain girl , not an outcast who almost becomes the victim of a pogrom-there is no other appropriate word-by the villagers ?
I 'm not sure about this , because if making a difference is the minimal criteria for something to be a being , then I would contend that color IS an object .
Being an RM is an indicator of desirable traits , but not a fail safe one .
I would like to speculate that a possible reason why some people resist learning better stockmanship is because a good stockperson must recognize that an animal is a conscious being that has feelings .
Although the selection was great , I can�t help but feel that $ 1.35 for a soda is a bit high for a vending machine .
In many cultures , a teacher is a person far removed from the students , in some cases a person to fear .
What should be a concern is the model upon which the NHL is standing .
He thinks a banana is a telephone , and answers it .
I have seen stones , and so for Peter to speak of Jesus as a stone is a very helpful analogy , speaking of stability , a firm position which is unmovable , unshakable .
I live in an area were the local hospital has an appalling mortality rate and a recent CQC report indicates that the quality of care is abysmal .
The act of rolling a barrel up a plank into a wagon is a simple example of the use of the inclined plane .
A channel is a unidirectional , unbuffered point-to-point link from one process to another .
A letter from the state chairman of a recognized political party certifying that a candidate is the nominee of that party and also signed by such candidate accepting that nomination shall constitute sufficient and appropriate evidence of nomination by a recognized political party .
Maintenance differs from a repair because a repair is an expenditure designed to return an asset to its normal operating condition .
I have blogged previously about the use of companion diagnostics whereby a lab test is used to determine whether a patient is a suitable candidate for an expensive drug , usually an expensive chemotherapeutic agent ( see : Companion Diagnostics Gains Wider Acceptance in FDA Despite Challenges ; Some Interesting Insights into Companion Diagnostics ) .
A jack is a young male Chinook that follows the winter runs upstream despite it 's small size .
" " Being a vegetarian is no big deal , Nan .
" Then he accused Canada of having an " inferiority complex , born of a trauma being the skinny and weakling bro to a beefy United States and a colonial outpost to the United Kingdom , whose Queen smiles happily from Canadian postage stamps .
An insult from a fool is a compliment .
An idea is an object insofar as it possesses an agency that is irreducible to the independent functioning of its parts .
He informed me that going behind a rock was the most humiliating experience he had ever had in his entire life .
Note that I said that a ticket is a string .
A revolution is a long and hard struggle ; and a revolutionary knows that he cannot yield one inch ( applause ) ; a revolutionary knows that for the revolution to retreat is to perish and therefore a revolutionary always prefers to die while advancing rather than to die while retreating !
" But if this is really so , if it be impossible to believe , and consequently to please God , so long as we receive or seek honour one of another , and seek not the honour which cometh of God only ; then in what a condition are all mankind !
In how beautiful a manner is this described by the Apostle : " God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes ; and there shall be no more death , neither sorrow , nor crying , neither shall there be any more pain : For the former things are done away !
I said why it is legitimate to call ' subject ' the local existence of the process that develops these generic multiplicities ( the formula was : ' a subject is a point of truth ' ) .
Such a metaphysics is a component of the new materialist dialectic .
If we examine closely a truth : a scientific theory , a work of art , a sequence of emancipating politics , or a new form of life under the law of love , we find some features which determine why a truth is an exception .
Seventhly , a truth is both infinite and generic .
A point is the moment where a truth has to pass withou guarantee .
You can tell when a book is an Orchard book , which is more than you can say for many other publishers .
It 's pointless worrying about that for now , because a year is a awfully long time in Welsh rugby .
They could put a red tie & write labour on a donkey 's a * * on some parts of sheffield & it would get voted in !!!
" Issues around admissions and choice are particularly sensitive when a school is the only one serving a large rural area .
" That 's why a park is a perfect escape from London , even if you are a resident in the city and just want to catch your breath for a while during the event .
A video is all you need !
A proof is an argument for , or sufficient evidence of the truth of a proposition .
A Playmate is a female model featured in the centerfold / gatefold of Playboy magazine as Playmate of the Month ( PMOM ) .
And a sister-why was this a secret ?
A poet is a nightingale who sits in darkness and sings to cheer its own solitude with sweet sounds .
While such a concentration is a perfectly legitimate exercise in its own right , these indivi ...
Its also worth remembering that an interview is a 2 way thing .
I tend to find that it helps to think of it as me interviewing them - whch it , of course , is - an interview is a two-way process , it 's not just them finding out about you .
And maybe if people have had a really good experience they should also post it so then people do n't think finding a job is all doom and gloom , sometimes it can be ok , and people get decent jobs and good careers out of it , of jobs that have n't appeared in the paper or on the Internet .
A manager is a manager and is so evaluated .
" It used to be true that to go for meal in a pub was a random experience .
" Great place for me to bye a guitar being a beginner .
He told him that there world is full of diamonds , and that " a diamond is a congealed drop of sunlight .
I think this is a bit harsh , but brainstorming , and covering all aspects of a business is a good thing !
Ask what a normal day in the job would include - this is a really handy question - most people forget that an interview is a two-way thing and is there to help you decide whether you want the job as well as whether they want you to do it !
We are not crammed in like battery hens like those in the South - East and housing / eating out / a pint are a lot cheaper .
The idea of a fixed annual forecast includes the assumption that a year is the ideal planning period , that we can get a good fix on revenues , costs and profits over that period , and that we can reasonably predict how external economic , political and social factors will turn out .
The fact is that a business is a continuous process .
The non-annual part acknowledges that a business is a continuous process and the rolling part keeps it focused on change and development .
Rather , such a mechanism is the best way of reaching those objectives .
After all , an ambulance is a vehicle-any dictionary will tell you that .
For example , assume you are in a federal court where there is no or little common law such that the defense of necessity does not apply and assume further that driving in a park is a criminal offense punishable by 0 to 1 year in prison .
Caring for a pet is a commitment !
We all know that in this state , running as a conservative is a fools bet .
I explained to someone once that a hermit is the most connected member of the Body of Christ because he or she carries the whole world in their heart .
[ A factorial is a little bird that builds its nest underground ] A factorial is a little bird that builds its nest underground , no tinkering frost etc , no interruptions .
" The issue of the University of Chicago lending its name to another institution to make a profit is a very problematic issue , " he says .
A course is a planned program of study with both broad and specific goals and with strategies for achieving those goals .
Generally , the author of a work is the individual who fixes the expression .
And the parson made it his text that week , and he said likewise , That a lie which is half a truth is ever the blackest of lies , That a lie which is all a lie may be met and fought with outright , But a lie which is part a truth is a harder matter to fight .
The plot , with Magneto trying to convert every human to a mutant is a little ridiculous , and seemingly not something you 'd expect the first time out .
Instead , what should replace such a belief is a goal ; that both males and females be adequately capable of numbers and language to produce a well-rounded person competent in the two different skill groups .
Coherence of pattern within a piece is a very important factor in its evaluation .
In this way , also , right margins can be approximated as a piece is begun , so that if a piece is a collaboration ( where two or more artists will simultaneously compose several pieces on a wall , frequently with edges touching ) , the next artist to the right knows where their left margin should be .
A signature is the same or similar to the artist 's tag ; if his usual tag is difficult to read , it will probably be simplified as a signature .
Man fucks a cat is the funniest thing I 've seen in a long time .
Making ' patent law ' a nightmare IS the goal behind the laws .
A mashup is a webpage or application that combines data or functionality from two or more external sources to create a new service .
In the below graphs , the response rate is the solid line and the left axis ; connection errors as a percentage are the dashed line and the right axis .
" ( A marionette is a specific type of puppet with strings attached to a control bar or bars , operated by a puppeteer from overhead . ) However , Henson himself always said that he came up with the word " Muppet " because he liked the sound of it .
Most automobiles and trucks have a similar appearance , at least close enough that we can tell when a object is an automobile or a truck just by looking at it .
I believed that a zygote was a baby , and removing it was murder .
a pilot recycling economy and environmental protection special action four jobs , custom iphone 4 cases , the construction of Ecological County , According to the USA Department of defense set rules , hogan rebel uomo , and he is wrapped in white cloth etc. The sea burial preparation time began in the eastern time at one ten in the morning and at 2 in the morning to complete and they said is willing to accept the choice of burial at sea because of the terrorist leader body state have been hard to find According to Islamic customs and traditions Laden 's body must be buried within 24 hours was buried at sea before Laden 's body has been photographed but the Obama administration did not make a decision whether the publication of these photos also did not decide when how to publish photos In 2003 American troops killed two of Sadam 's son Uday and Qusay who released their body photos in order to prove that they have died The Pentagon officials also revealed they buried at sea before has been through a variety of ways that remains is this Laden himself A site is believed to be one of Laden 's many wives have confirmed the identity of Laden Intelligence officials say they compared Laden and several of his family members of DNA also found that the matching degree can be sure he is Laden In addition America through unique " face recognition " technology to confirm the identity of the Laden the years come and go like a shadow of the Al Qaeda terrorist from Pakistan in the capital Islamabad about 64 kilometers from the city of Abbottabad was attacked in the head and killed A USA senior government officials earlier in the day said small commando this action by the execution of a helicopter The official said the commandos in this Laden is building for under 40 minutes besides this Laden another three people were killed in the raid USA believes two of the men is a messenger and a person is this The son of Laden Another woman was building a man as " killed shield " Two other women were injured During the raid USA a helicopter because of failure and crashed American officials say the plane was the crew and the commandos destroyed the crew aboard a helicopter out of the building New York Times : this & middot ; bin Laden was buried at sea laden human Yongnian County Environmental Protection Bureau to take four measures to strengthen the transfer of hazardous waste .
An astringent is a substance that causes contraction of body tissue , so they will help the swelling in your throat go down , in turn diminishing the pain .
A deal is a deal .
English law assumed that any child born in a marriage were the husband 's , it 's true , but the corollary of that was that he could take them away from his wife and send them to be raised wherever he saw fit .
A blowtorch is a fabulous tool to add a little pizzazz to any dessert , but it is classically known for finishing a delicious crème brulee .
The show is n't pulling any punches here , it may be using alien species , but it 's showing a racist being a racist even while he acts as a superhero , and it uses actual attitudes people may encounter ( " You must be one of the good ones .
How do managers construct knowledge and understanding an dhow is this influenced by social interactions at work ?
a roof is all it needs to be enclosed .
our basic human right are being taken away from us which is fundamentaly wrong we are supposed to live in a democracy were the people have choice , nobody has ever forced me to stand next to a smoker in a pub , club or any other place , in fact i have found most smokers to be very polite if there habit is causing offence .
On the front of each of the egg shells are various funny faces which match the colour of the egg inside , so they an be used for colour matching when a child is a little bit older .
I think a pagoda is a great idea , i might have to do that .
Lord of the Past : A Compilation is a 1989 album by Bob Bennett , his fourth release and only true official ' greatest hits ' compilation , including four new songs .
A meeting is a pleasure , a parting is a grief , An unconstant lover is worse than a thief ; A thief can but rob you , and take all you have , But an unconstant lover will send you to your grave .
Baroness Howarth of Breckland : My Lords , is the Minister aware that one of the most dreadful times for any person with a disability is the transition from childhood to adulthood ?
An exception was the interesting series of articles in the Times in November 2009 by Michael Binyon .
A day is a long time in football , a week an eternity .
Even the slightest failure to such a person is a personal insult , so when they fail they will attempt to find a scapegoat .
i took it to my local dealer and 10 minutes on a laptop was all it took --- oh and £ 25 .
Voluntary it may be , but a job 's a job whether it 's voluntary or whatever and no amount of pointless trolling from the likes of you will change my opinion .
The breakfast was delish and plentiful ( one negative was waiting to be seated in specific areas for hotel guests ) a plus was the capuccino maker and complimentary ice cream ...
An addiction is an addiction - if they do n't want help to stop - ie .
i take your point that they 'll get the money some other way but a crime is a crime in my view and dealing to addicts is really low .
Yes , a crime is a crime , but life is life .
Or if a beggar is a drug addict ?
Nails down a blackboard is a perfect description .
An example is the current structure of a blog page , for instance , say this post on process .
This visualization of an installation for an exhibition is an excellent means of communicating the idea to all those who may be involved .
This is the stage digital photgraphy is at IMHO , people take photos with the sole intention of messing about with them on photoshop ( a little too much for many teens , a computer is no replacement for an eye for the shot ) .
A crypt is a stone chamber or vault beneath the floor of a burial vault , possibly containing coffins or relics .
Reckon that any driver who needs to slam on his or her brakes when turning a corner is a terrible driver .
" What we say it may be an illusion is the acceleration of this expansion - that is , the possibility that the expansion is , and has been , increasing its rate .
An ellipse is a flattened circle like the one shown in the figure to the right .
A society is a collection of interconnected yet independent units that are in regular contact with one another .
Starting a game is a simple matter of naming your galaxy , determining how many resources both you and the computer players get , how many computer players there are and how smart they are , how the galaxy looks ( shape , size , density ) and how many years there will be per turn .
Such a group is The Interfaith Working Group .
Everyone that wears a mask is a villain , and you 're trying to be a blue-eye ( babyface ) .
A theosophist is any independent seeker after universal truth .
" You bet your ass a pitmaster is a chef .
A bridge was the perfect solution .
Last year we thought a man who could run down the field with a football was a hero .
An alternative is the Physical Performance Test ( PPT ) .33 This performance-based test includes seven usual daily activities .
A cookie is a small file that can be placed on your computer 's hard disk or on a website server .
So , reach out for your pencil and let the magic of black and white unfold A sketch is a rapidly executed freehand drawing that is not intended as a finished work , often consisting of a multitude of overlapping lines .
A mammogram is an X-ray taken through all the layers of the breast at once .
A simulation is an imitation of some real device or state of affairs .
The crucial question , then , is that if you picture the universe as a monarchy , how can you believe that a republic is the best form of government , and so be a loyal citizen of the United States ?
A spaceball is a highly recommended , but slightly expensive input device that incorporates all six rotational and translational axis in one device .
In real world terms , the sun can be considered a directional lightsource , while a lamp is a positional one .
Clearly , driving an icebreaker is a lot of fun .
An example is a subway train that comes at night and when you enter it you 're doomed to go with it forever ...
A spectre is a ( usually terrifying ) phantom , apparition , or ghost , or an unreal appearance .
A phantom is an immaterial being or ghost .
Good Lorde , what a thyng is this , that alwayes from some furthermost ende of the worlde , there come downe new powers from God , to be worshipped of all the earth ?
MAM 2 He who prefers a treaty is an enemy of our state .
Such a transfer is an outright gift that resembles a trust because it is held and administered by a third person the custodian who has the power to expend the custodial property for the use and benefit of the minor .
A mortgage is a loan that is attached onto your title deeds - it means you ca n't sell that property without paying the mortgage off .
The lack of a profit is a stumbling block that must be overcome , but the funds do derive from public sources , and we need to be assured that the projects are able to bring tangible public benefits .
In criminal cases there must in addition be a " point of law of general public importance " involved ; in civil cases the existence or otherwise of such a point is a reason for granting or refusing leave to appeal .
A marriage is a legal and religious ceremony for the blessing on the union between two people who also happen to be of the opposite sex .
We acknowledge that the building of such a party is a long process .
Truly , the Room of Requirement 's ability to create a floo is a significant security risk .
1880 A court judgement , in favour of the Post Office , concluded that a telephone was a telegraph , and that a telephone conversation was a telegram , within the meaning of Section 4 of the Telegraph Act , 1869 [ 1 ] .
" Access " as a verb is another example - drives me nuts !
I only found out what an url was this week - no wonder people looked at me askance when I related stories from the paper about toffs when they previously mentioned the word ...
Put simply , a podcast is a regular digital media publication which folks can subscribe to using podcast subscription tools on their computers or other mobile devices .
I think most peoples intial reaction to a prank is a little anger .
Running a salon is an expensive business - did you know that a typical salon can use up to 40,000 kWhs of electricity a year , costing around £ 4,000 ?
' Personal friendship with white men and women was one defence offered by Gandhi ; a second was an openness to their ideas .
The public perception and talk about a software is all about sales - but at the end of the day it 's the quality of a software moving firms to buy and use it or not .
if we are going to re-do UI , let 's also be prepared to destroy it for many non value added intermediaries in various processes ... blindly Ajazing a web 1.0 or green screen or SaaSing a process is no way to " fix the enterprise " ... it is paving the old UI and business process cow path ...
After a round is the time to think about what went wrong and devise ways to improve .
How can a Goth be a Christian , is what you are concerned about .
This question has been asked on numerous occasions : Can a Goth be a Christian ?
No screen has as many pixels per inch as the iPhone , and some people do n't want to lug around a toaster-sized phone like the Droid X. But the most important part about a touchscreen is the " touch " part , which Apple delivers 10 - times the experience of and Android hardware manufacturer .
In situations ( as in the Plante case ) where a client is an organization rather than an individual , the client may only be able to speak , and petition , through its attorney .
Whether or not a GMO label has a scientific basis or a precedent is a weak argument : labeling standards in general are constantly evolving in response to consumer demand .
" Whether or not a GMO label has a scientific basis or a precedent is a weak argument : labeling standards in general are constantly evolving in response to consumer demand .
In essence , a throne is a chair upon which man lowers his posture .
The Internet is a Playground is the first best-selling book by David Thorne and is in stores now .
A well known method to arrive at the intrinsic value of a business is the Discounted Cash Flow .
" Dear fellow grown-up , " Pocahontas writes , " First thing I did as a woman was the dishes .
A resort is a place to get away from it all and reconnect with family and friends .
To defend the idea of prostitution by lowering our views of intercourse to the point where it can be happily bought and sold is to also accept just as happily the idea that a woman is an object .
mybodyisacage : TMILDRED said that being a woman is a million tiny daily violence and humiliations , and even for those ...
In economics , an externality is the cost or benefit that affects a party who did not choose to incur that cost or benefit .
If the Organization Man was a child of the entitlement era , born of the Mommy Corporation , for whom a layoff was a debilitating psychic shock , the cloudworker is his antithesis , the ultimate career / life pragmatist .
But apparently to own a Siamese is the equivalent of a witch 's familiar ...
A thesis or a dissertation is the outcome of a substantial effort .
Dinner With a Curator Dinner with a Curator is a seasonal series where Museum staff and guests discuss a featured topic related to World War II while enjoying a delicious three-course dinner .
Not so much the portraiture , but the set pieces definitely are fantasies and I think that the model or the sitter in a picture is the window for the viewer - for any person - to be a part of that fantasy .
On some woodworking projects where a great deal of strength is needed , or where uneven surfaces may need to be glued , an epoxy is the way to go .
But how much of a threat is this in practice ?
Having a newborn is a big adjustment .
It occurred to me that my upcoming search for a tenure track job would fit the bill , according to the following course of logic : looking for a job is a process of sorts , and the " process blog " is a thing , insofar as people blog about the process of traveling around the world or the process of renovating their kitchen .
An arrhythmia is a disorder of the heart rate or heart rhythm .
An exception is the hibiscus mealybug , which is pinkish-brown and lacks the fringe .
We were met at the shipside by their official Welcoming Committee and supplied with free packs of postcards , maps etc. High on a hillside is the oldest Western-style building in the country - Glover House .
The utter devastation , the blackened bodies - and sometimes the only thing that remained of a person was a silhouette against a wall - was too much to bear .
Two loudspeakers on the top of of a house is the island 's hyperlocal news service MRS Radio run by Ordrick Samuel , known as Jicky .
Do n't get me wrong - a car is a major investment and if lovingly washing and polishing it brings them pleasure , then more power to their overworked elbows !
The only people who are still saying it 's a project are those who are n't fully aware .
An item is the smallest editorial unit in ncse .
a department is a section of an issue that groups certain articles together .
A run is a series of issues .
A serial is any publication that is published in parts .
A volume is the bound form of a serial .
A redundancy is a potentially fair reason for dismissal , so an employee dismissed because of redundancy may be unable to claim ' unfair dismissal ' .
" An audience is an audience , and when I get up there , I try to transform people .
A PhD is a substantial and original piece of research leading to an 80,00 -100,000 word thesis , usually completed over three years ( or longer if you chose to study part time ) .
Finding inspiration for a design is an easy task these days .
If a member of the school 's staff suspects that a child is a victim of abuse or has reason to believe that he / she is at risk of abuse , they should immediately ( before the end of the school day ) , refer to the school 's designated Child Protection Officer .
The only type of human being you can fit in a box is a corpse .
An example of such a limitation is the dedication of a bridleway subject to a bridlegate .
A transformer is an electric device with two coils placed on a closed loop metallic core .
The customer 's first impression of a venue is the way the door supervisors look and the way they speak to them at the front entrance .
Effectively controlling the entry of people and items to a venue is an important part of the door supervisor 's job .
Firstly , it should be said that for any actor and any director of that actor , grabbing and maintaining a hold on an audience is a tough call when all you 're offering them is two sizeable slabs of text on a bare stage from a single performer for an hour each .
PERINO : I think a date for a meeting is a little bit less important than figuring out what recommendations people want to come to the table with .
Laying some inches deep beneath heavy flagstones in a storeroom was a considerable supply of the finest pure white , unadulterated powder .
According to the dictionary , a clone is a group of genetically identical cells that are descended from a common ancestor , such as a clone of bacterial cells grown from one original bacterial cell in a laboratory .
For them , a limit sketch is a small category equipped with a set of small cones ; a model is a Set \ mathbf {Set}-valued functor which sends the prescribed cones to limit cones .
On the top of an article is the Move button .
Was there a disadvantage being a pioneer at this stage ?
" A point is a cross section of a line .
A line is a cross section of a plane .
A plane is a cross section of a body .
A body is the cross section of a tetra-dimensional body , that is to say , of four dimensions .
But what I noticed then was that as a girl being a nerd was really a problem .
But later when I came out as a nerd being a girl was a problem .
A project is a computer based Rabbinical story teller .
The latest start time of an activity is the latest that an activity can start without delaying the whole project .
The float of an activity is the difference between its earliest start time and its latest start time , and so reflects how much leeway you have in scheduling the activity .
An idea is a building block , something you use to build something bigger .
In Coll 's view , seeing oneself as a citizen is a process-of gaining self-esteem , of advocating for one 's family , and of participating in public political events such as Monreal 's work for voter registration .
Too large a space is the most common mistake .
Allowing parallelism inside an object is a potential source for the introduction of " magic " , ill-defined behavior , which is need of analysis for clarification .
An ensemble is an object having a single thread of control , while at the same time connoting an entity with internal parallelism .
A state is the abstraction that connects what " happens " between the end of a transition and the beginning of a follow-up transition .
A transition is a binary directed connection between pairs of states .
A guard is a condition ( boolean-valued function ) that must be satisfied in order for the transition to occur .
Note that you only receive a bonus track when a river is the very next terrain in your column .
A circle is the pattern used to organize most rhythmic modes and cycles , and also every level of the dhikr ritual and the Sufi samā ' .
I loved that show on stage and laughed harder than anyone else on opening night , but to do a show on Broadway is a really hard job - eight shows a week is a grueling schedule and I have such respect for those who do that all the time .
Therefore - A car is a horse .
Sit in the chairs and make sure they 're comfortable and that they do n't wobble ; make sure a table is the right height , etc. Do n't be shy about giving your potential purchase a test-drive .
" Maybe the ten jokes they sent in as a submission are the best jokes they 've had in the last ten years , " Meyers said .
An example is the īqā ' al-istimā ' ( figure 17 ) , which accompanies the zaffa procession ' of the groom from his house to the makhdara , the " refuge " of the bride .
Our last trip as a family was a bit rough and not all that relaxing , so I was nervous about more travel , this time across the country .
A ride is a true San Francisco treat and many visitors do n't want to go home until they 've done it .
It 's worth bearing in mind that a parrot is a dumb animal , incapable of anything but the most primitive reasoning , and completely unaware of anything to do with the stockmarket .
I believe such a proposal is both unwise and short-sighted .
A CTBT was the only arms control initiative set forth in the 1995 NPT Conference decisions with a specified date , [ the Conference on Disarmament was called upon to complete work on CTBT negotiations no later than 1996 ] underscoring how strong was the desire of the NPT parties to finally realize this long-elusive objective .
A pattern is a sequence of pattern items ( see below ) .
An archetype is a way to describe something universally accepted in a quick and easy way .
' A gig is a gig to me , and I feel as committed to a show that I 'm doing in Southend , as to one that I 'm doing here in London .
Dorschner who recently wrote about " a rule is a rule , " Diplopundit will start monitoring the prior gigs of ambassadorial nominees , particularly those of our career diplomats .
I have proven in my first term , as I have constantly proved until now that the infrastructure facilities of a city are the gauge of its progress .
, to be exploited in a sweatshop is a better option for them than being self-employed selling matchbooks on the street .
That transparent attempt to exploit Emanuel 's Law -- a crisis is a terrible thing to waste -- failed for health care because no one is stupid enough to believe that the 2008 financial collapse was caused by a lack of universal health care .
A combatant is a member of the armed forces of the enemy , while a civilian is not .
If a person is a member of the enemy armed forces , if the person is a civilian directly participating in hostilities , there is no obligation under the laws of war to try and detain that person rather than to use lethal force .
Sending an e-card is the digital equivalent of scraping a barrel and sticking the result in the post .
A webpage is a document , as any document like a memo or love letter it have parts , this parts are the header , the content and the footer , this are the same basic structures present in most webpages on internet .
Taking a day away from home or work to visit a spa is a great way to escape your stresses , but sometimes you need immediate relief ... after hours .
A dialog is a small pop-up window that provides some feedback or asks for some input .
Determines whether a node is a descendant of another .
The idea of being a pastor was a non-starter .
All in all a draw was a fair result .
First of the F -35 B. Well the F -35 as a whole is a compromise in the name of stealth .
The F -35 as a whole is a sensible package .
Usually the only sight one gets of an adder is the tail disappearing into a bush - so I am very grateful to Brett .
In a cupboard are some jugs of ale , some vegetables and fruits and potatoes - all normal .
A declarant is the natural person ( an individual ) or legal person ( company , partnership , public body , etc ) who either makes the declaration in his own name or in whose name a declaration is made by a representative .
A presentation is an act of communication between you and your audience .
This ^^^ it is of course possibly , but they are not easy to find , it is not as easy is slicing and pulling it out straight off , a scanner is the best way to locate , even though u may beabel to feel it and trying to cut a dog with a blade unsedated and rummaging around a fair bit of tissue and is going to result in a very wriggly / squealing dog .
Giving a presentation is a compulsory part of the project and if this is missed for any justifiable reason , it will have to be given at other date to be fixed .
( A moment is the product of the weight acting at a point multiplied by the perpendicular distance of that point to any other chosen point .
" Relevance to J.J. Gibson Gibson 's notion of perceiving and using an affordance is a special case of this general ability to think about what is and is not possible and why .
An example is the development of theories of the atomic structure of matter and the processes that can occur as atoms are rearranged to form molecules of various sorts .
Pupils who arrive after the register closes will be marked absent for the whole session ( a session being a morning or an afternoon ) .
Motors were fitted with either plain bronze or ball bearings with , in general , those for Europe with voltages above 200 , using ball races and most American-market U 90 s with plain bearings - though an exception was the first 40 Watt motor that used ball-races .
How Ireland went from the sick man of Europe to the rich man in less than a generation is an amazing story .
Certainly one cause of mate killing in these cats could be poor environment , and the hand-rearing of one of an intended pair could also contribute , but I feel that to suggest an intelligent cat like a ' cloudie ' is unable to distinguish between a mate and a meal is a little simplistic .
A geoglyph is a work of rock art that was made from moving or arranging stones or earth across a landscape .
Our guide a Frenchman was a bit of a twat to be honest but the rest of the group were a good bunch .
A second is the search for ' ordinary people ' who might be mobilised to participate in community based and civic action - those not already attached to entrenched interests or existing forms of mobilisation .
A torch is a good idea , too .
But also , simply getting a student who has just come to the country with no prior knowledge of the English language through a GCSE is a major achievement .
Such a suggestion is an unspeakable lie .
So no wonder the prototypical image of a conflict is a fight .
A 1 hour visit once a week is the recommended length and frequency .
The measure of performance of such a vehicle is the dv that it can do .
Having an abortion is a huge undertaking for most women and not a decision that is taken lightly .
So an iPod is an MP 3 player .
I do n't eat meat because I do n't like it which is a personal choice but i know how to cook the stuff and anybody who buys a frozen chicken and defrosts it either by running it under hot water or using a microwave is a fukwit .
With the bug now gone they hav ' nt returned to normal either :mad: To say visit you 're doctor if it has n't gone in a week is a bit over the top I feel .
To say visit you 're doctor if it has n't gone in a week is a bit over the top I feel .
[ sighs ] Samantha : I guess a promise is a promise .
Barney : Driving a car is a little harder than a boat , Missy .
The thing i love about getting a ticket are those pretty little yellow bags they put them in .
The inquest heard the cleaner showed no signs of trying to break his fall and that a haemorrhage was the subsequent cause of his death .
Loci A locus is a set of points satisfying a certain condition .
An atom is the smallest possibleparticle of an element that can exist Structure of the AtomThe atom consists of a tiny , massive centralnucleus surrounded by electrons .
At the time i thought this was odd and i realised that corralling us on a bridge was a tactical move on their part which it proved to be .
The idea that people should not use their democratic right to protest because there might be some violent people using it as a vehicle is a ridiculous suggestion .
One aspect that , perhaps crucially , did not become a habit was a strand of savage contemporary satire .
But if a week is a long time in politics , six months is an eternity .
To quote Rahm Emanuel , a tragedy is a terrible thing to waste .
A gun is a potential danger to more people if carried in public than just kept in the home .
Basically , an informant is another assassin that 's in the city who is failing miserably at their own tasks .
As for a book being a library ... unless you are a complete bigot ( which is possible ) saying that book should n't be in the library is like saying anything by Orson Wells should n't be in the library .
One thing I would say to anyone who is going to write a dissertation is this : you must be motivated for yourself , not for anyone else .
Motivating raw young recruits and those enjoying an improbable Indian Summer in their career is one thing ; moulding a disparate group of petulant superstars into a team is another entirely .
Posting three times a week is all I can keep up with , and not feel like I am neglecting my other priorities .
A working class autodidact like Smith could scarcely be conceived of in James ' sclerotically-stratified universe ; such a being was a monstrosity which would be punished for the sheer hubris of existing .
However , setting the story inside a prison is an interesting juxtaposition of the usual cliche .
Save it with the music In general , the process of making a movie is a difficult one , but some genres are more difficult than others .
Perhaps it is the fact that , for the majority of users , the design of a page is the stand out factor of the web and thus the designers are perceived to be the most important ones on a team .
But a designer is a designer - and a designer is , to pt it briefly , someone who thoughtfully plans solutions to problems and means of communication .
The job of a designer is a lot harder to nail down , because it 's more subjective .
I have learnt PHP , HTML , CSS , photoshop , Dreamweaver , Flash etc over the last 2 years and have come across various challenging aspects , to say you can learn these in a weekend is an insult to all designers .
To say you can learn html and css over a weekend is a complete oversight , I would trust anyone to design a site after only learning the code for 2 days .
My memory on exactly when I got an NES is a bit fuzzy , but I can say that it was at the very earliest 1989 - this is actually somewhat late in the life cycle of the NES ( the Genesis was introduced within a year , and the SNES not much later than that ) .
The spirit of defeating a man is the same for ten million men .
In Gizzi 's own words , an analemma is the " path the sun makes over our heads in a given year , " a term he discovered while reading National Geographic as his mother was receiving chemotherapy .
But the process of ordering and having a pizza is an ordeal filled with distress from the start to the finish .
For those of you who do n't know a fanzine is an amateur magazines produced by science fiction fans which covered many topics , sometimes even science fiction .
A paragraph is a sub-paragraph of another paragraph if the other paragraph is the last preceding paragraph that has a lower level .
Hosting a giveaway is a great way to build an audience for your blog while showing off your crafty talent .
Nope , a FunctionExpression is an expression which defines special type of function .
~~~ Nope , a FunctionExpression is an expression which defines special type of function .
Notice , if you 'll test this code in Firebug console , in the first example a caller is a context of the evaluation console 's code , but not the global .
One of the first things one is taught by a predator is the many reasons why you ca n't get help .
" A pilgrimage is a prayer .
An example is a lesson including extensive document analysis , evaluation of historical events , and the creation of an end product .
It 's not a hyphen , but a dash is a short line that serves as a punctuation mark and often represented by one or more hyphens .
A hyphen is a short punctuation mark used to join words ( such as well-read or jack-of-all-trades ) and to separate syllables of a single word or the characters in a telephone number ( 123 -555 -0123 ) .
The first thing you notice before you even see a car is the sound of traffic : a continued stream of honking sounds , short or long , melodious or sharp , and usually quite loud .
About the safest place to be in an emergency is a nuke plant because people have planned for them .
One of the issues that has buzzed around Las Vegas Sands like a shoo-fly is the lack of a line of succession .
The problem is , the whole cyberuniverse is expanding so fast that any kid who can hyperlink a GIF is a webmaster nowadays !
I know this for a fact-it 's the reason I 'm still around .
The choice of a lawyer is an important decision and should not be based solely upon advertisements .
I was just providing myself as a real life example of why 80 k a year is a tight budget for some US families .
A crate is a safe place where you could keep your dog at night , especially when you are traveling as this prevents any serious injury done to your dog in case of accidents .
In that applet , we see that a dodecahedron is a volume of space that is bounded by 12 planes .
( A hyperplane is a 3 - dimensional space that slices through the 4 - dimensional space , the same way a 2 - dimensional plane can slice through our 3 - dimensional space .
A bipyramid is a pair of pyramids stuck together on their bases .
A fascinating aspect of this chapter as a whole is the recurrence of certain tectonic / geomorphologic motifs .
One of the most common and effective household item I love to use to bring up the glam factor when creating a centerpiece is a mirror .
because a sociopath is a " person " who is UNABLE to empathize or CARE about the harm they do to other human beings and will look his or her VICTIM in the eyes and tell them they are NOT being VICTIMIZED even while victimizing them .
The initial appointment with a homeowner is a home assessment during which the contractor surveys insulation levels , potential moisture problems , indoor water use , and equipment efficiencies .
It 's a total bratty , bitchy , trashy fuck wad move , but I 'm still giving him a delicate opera clap , because writing " fuck off " in the memo of a check is the redefinition class .
Unauthorized use of a vehicle is a class A misdemeanor .
Unlawfully concealing a will is a class G felony .
Controlling a blimp is a little different than flying an airplane .
being a dad is the best job i ever had .
Rolling the maximum on a die is an " Ace " .
Seeing yourself as a victim is a powerless and sad place to be .
Make each section be a separate file ; a section is a part of the document processed independently , most often created to avoid memory overflow .
In my mind a playmaker is a player that can have a ( positive ) gamechanging impact through his ability to make big plays on offense or defense .
" If a patient is a low responder genetically and has low activation of complement in the immune system ( i.e. a low c 4 a ) , the dose might be 100 ng per week .
The start of a run is the noisiest .
A hands-on without a video is a waste of time imo .
It is important to remember that even if children respond positively to online predators , they are still the victims in the same way that anyone who has fallen for a scam is a victim .
A tripod is the best way to battle shake issues - and a good tripod is almost critical .
A beanbag is a good way to stabilize your camera on top of other objects or the ground .
Oh well , a win is a win , right ?
A presbuter is an elderly man or woman in service .
And ... if a person is a member of a church where the elder / overseer are not godly as described in the bible , that person should go to the leadership and politely make their case .
One of my favorite gifts from a co-worker was a plant .
A crime is a crime , if the laws that are supposed to protect our raptors were upheld and inforced there would be no need for quota 's .
" But pearls are a powerful symbol , and a pashmina is a perfect cover-up to combat the heavy air-conditioning .
The right to a job and to earn a living is a key factor in ensuring equality between women and men .
Headmaster Richard Biggs said " To win this extremely competitive and highly prestigious competition three years in a row is a quite remarkable achievement .
The interaction elements of a system are the parts of the MLE that staff and students work with day after day , and so they have a lot at stake here .
Another example of the witty transformation of a name was the village of Auchonvillers on the Somme battlefield in France ; the British soldiers renamed it to " Ocean Villas " .
Less winning a formula is the indulgence Figgis allows his ensemble cast .
Plus there is a reduction in the overall number of sub-systems - and the simpler a system is the less it is likely to develop faults .
Having a baby is a team effort with you as the star player .
Compilation of a kernel is a good way to test your hardware , because it involves a massive amount of computing .
Staging the world championship match in a museum is a great way to advertise the museum on a world scale .
The ' degree ' of a node is the number of connections it has with other nodes .
The ' centrality ' of a node is the fraction of the network to which the node is connected .
It is possible to sort nodes in terms of their connectivity so that for example individuals appearing at the periphery of a graph are those that tend to be isolated .
Whilst working in industry it can also be easy to lose sight of the fact that an EngD is an academic project .
The organisation 's double A rating is a sign of confidence in its ability to deliver its commitments to investors , and it has a strong asset base to offer as security - its 67,000 homes .
I studied your school 's website and thought the boarding and school fees of £ 7000 to £ 8000 a term were a gigantic rip-off until I looked at the facilities and the extensive staff lists and expensive support staff list and the pastoral care and the staff providing home-life care and study tutoring personnel and I thought wow .
Navara : So in the end a draw is a normal result .
We believe that students benefit from learning in ' research mode ' , and that part of being at a university is the opprotunity to make new discoveries and test orthodox theories .
Keeping up with the speed of general traffic on a motorway is an important safety factor for bikes .
This frank account of one leader 's journey to become a coach is a must have for beginner coaches .
A jobholder is an employee or worker working in Great Britain under a contract , aged at least 16 and under 75 with qualifying earnings , ie gross annual earnings of more than £ 5,035 , and not more than £ 33,540 .
Hello Steven , it took me a long while to leave a message , and in fact had to revisit your site a few times to sign up to your 28 day course , reaching out to an unknown is a little intimidating .
A corporation is a legal person but the concept of a moral or an immoral corporation is an oxymoron .
A corporation is an artificial person with such powers as are given to it by statute or its constitution , its memorandum and articles of association in the case of companies incorporated under the Companies Acts 1985 or earlier .
The radiation does n't disappear , however , and exists as long as its half-life dictates , a half-life being the amount of time it takes for the radionuclide 's mass ( weight ) to decrease by half .
Whether an item is a fixture depends on the purpose of its attachment ( or , annexation ) to the land ( or , more commonly , building / property ) , and whether it could be removed without doing irreparable damage to the property / land [ note 7 ] .
Tex : An ah was a ' tellin ' Hank not to mutilate tha criminals .
Bailey wrote , " Since there about 81 [ sic ] million different varieties of snakes , difficulty arises in determining whether a snake is a ' peaceful , solitary and beneficial animal ' as Jeff says , or a murderous carnivore that will either attack you like a shark on bloody meat or squeeze you like a ripe orange .
Migration across borders or within a country is a reality for many societies across the world .
I actually did not know it was called extraneous - having a blog is a very good way to learn new things !
And a suspicion of that kind must be automatic in a democracy where the governor of a state is the brother of the would-be president ...
No , what really divides a social conservative from a social liberal is the simple question whether or not an abortion is a murder .
Green Design Elements The fundamental design tenet of the Center and the Boott Cotton Mills Museum as a whole was the restoration of an historic building , thus following green practices of sustainability and re-use .
And I could also see that a musical is a staggeringly complex , collaborative behemoth , entailing levels of creative risk and patience that are unthinkable to me .
More important than regular eyesight checks for a radiologist is a regular Cognition test to make sure that he / she knows the " corner fracture " may be the result of a metabolic disorder rather than inflicted trauma as originally suggested by their predecessors Caffey and Kempe in 1962 .
Making money is the key thing , not earning a diploma is the key thing now days .
To all of those who have been sharing their dyke-ly status , to me being a dyke is an attitude .
A document is a top-level window without an owner .
A nation is a historically constituted , stable community of people , formed on the basis of a common language , territory , economic life , and psychological make-up manifested in a common culture .
The definition of Black people as a nation was the ideological basis on which the Communist Party developed a program for Black liberation .
An issue that still plagues the 360 as an extender is the fact that if you 're not in the market for a game console , $ 200 is a bit much to pay simply for an extender .
To the legislators of Maine , Vermont , Massachusetts , and New York , a narcotic was a narcotic , whatever its name .
Yes , a storyteller-in-residence is a good goal , but not one that most organizations can get to practically .
A group is any combination of two or more individuals acting jointly who organize for the principal purpose to influence the outcome of one or more elections and who take action the major purpose of which is to influence the outcome of an election .
How could such a one be a mere man , receiving the beginning of His existence from Mary , and not rather God the Word , and the only-begotten Son ?
Two major meetings a day are the cornerstone : A first meeting about 11 a.m. with all the reporters to get a list ( we call it a " budget " ) of the stories they 're working on and the second one about 4 p.m. to nail down what stories are actually coming in-and what the gist of them is .
In a credit trading program , a baseline is the minimum set of practices or minimum level of performance which a participant must meet before he / she may implement additional practices from which tradable environmental credits can be generated .
" A liberal is a man too broadminded to take his own side in a quarrel .
A human is the same as an angel in heaven , meaning angels are people and there reception of love and wisdom from God depends on their acceptance of Him .
Not to be able to remember a dream was a regrettable loss to a writer 's creativity .
A year is all it would take for McCants to clean his act up / .
The scion of a noble or royal family , he is said to have been born near Glastonbury and to have been educated at Canterbury , where an uncle was the archbishop .
The selfish sex of a husband is a sensorimotor coupling with his wife but it is not conjunctive .
Hence the marriage of a man and a woman is the foundation for the universe and its endless future .
So , perhaps this new rule they want to test is a sensible solution , because earning 3 points for a win is a very bad idea .
First was William Safire ( that curmurdgeonly keeper of the purity of the English Language ) , who wrote : " A newt is a small lizard related to the salamander and sometimes confused with a spotted eft " [ December 4 , 1994 from P.L. Beltz ] .
A newt is an amphibian , a class whose living members have a well-defined aquatic , larval stage .
A few feathers and part of a leg were all that remained of the bird .
Drug investigations : to show whether or not an individual was a drug user .
* A certificate IS a qualification e.g. The IoD certificate in company direction , one would assume , is a qualification .
omg that is pretty gross , a gothic wedding is awesome but a bride in a coffin is a bit gross and horrable !
I exist IN space and time - whereas according to the standard dogmatic understanding of God is that He does not - so I would HAVE to say that I am more REAL than God - which as a term is an abstract .
But of course , over the last few decades the only people that matter in a company are the shareholders , who demand increased dividends every year , so nobody wants to spend on training , investment in people , or better wages .
Learning lines and your blocking for a play is a task .
A cookie is a small text file written to your hard drive that contains information about your account on this Website .
Submitting an abstract is a multi-step process .
The process of amending an abstract is the same as the original submission process , except that the submission form will be automatically filled in with the answers that you gave previously - you do n't have to change an answer if you do n't want to .
A phobia is an irrational fear in which you cannot even see a picture of the object without provoking a flight response .
think you deserve a rant were the polish builders tall ?
Errr are you sure cutting up a cooker with a chainsaw is a good idea ?
A sphere is a round object .
An inquest is an inquiry into the circumstances surrounding a death .
Wallace ( Richard Warwick ) may be tasting forbidden fruit , the whip 's tart ( Rupert Webster ) - a whip is a school monitor - but is also an exceptionally skilled gymnast .
Instead we must learn that , though a deal is a necessary goal , the solution will likely not come from a singular breakthrough , but from incremental progress in forums and on issues where progress is more possible in the short term .
Its a crying shame that when it comes to your home security a lot of you opt for the cheaper option , well after all an alarm is an alarm right ..?
Well its not quite that simple , that 's like saying a car is a car .
A comp is a school for everyone , regardless of ability , background etc etc. I think there are exceptions ( like faith schools ) so do correct me if I 'm way off the mark .
Whether an asset is a saving(s) or an investment depends on where the money is invested : if it is cash then it is savings , if its value can fluctuate then it is investment .
An undertaking is a promise made to the court to refrain from certain behaviour , and in the past has been used by the courts as an alternative to granting an order .
Another name for a collective is a gang .
A funeral is a special occasion , as much as a wedding is .
An exhibition is a visual presentation of information e.g. photographs , charts , maps , video , interactive technology .
For us a convertible is all about finding a great road and soaking up the environment .
The idea that a college is a place to inspire young people intellectually - with ideas that may shock and even repulse some - to help them develop into mature and critically minded individuals that can make up their own minds about the world , seems to have lost popular support .
( The poetic value of a rule being the effect of breaking it ...
GM crops have the potential to allow greater productivity , reduced use of pesticides and increase nutrition , particularly in regions where vitamin A deficiency is a problem .
One of the elements of a game is a level playing field .
What I thought from a distance was a ruined cottage turned out to be a square of felled trees and a desolate stump .
A conference is a big commitment of time , as you note , so I find it easier to step outside my comfort zone when we 're talking about a more bite-sized chunk of time !
Headlines that claim " Salt is killing our children " are hard to ignore , but what do they mean , and how much of a problem is this seemingly-innocent seasoning ?
The basic legal tennent exists in the legislation , if the CC of Police thinks a person is a risk he ought not to issue the ticket and be prepared to explain the reasons why in accordance with the law .
Thus , for Qart-Hadast and her allies , the control of a colony is the control of the province .
Additionally , the ability to use a computer is a must for today 's geologists .
Driving an automobile is a big responsibility ; even a small error or lapse in judgment by a driver can result in a serious injury or death of another motorist or pedestrian .
The core of a franchise is a proven ( which is to say a profitable ) business idea that can be replicated in multiple sites .
Replicating the culture of an organization is a far more complicated undertaking than replicating a few program elements .
Palese concludes with a kind of public health maxim , stating that the more dangerous a virus is the more important it is to study .
( A teapot was the first computer - generated image , and is often included in CG-things as an inside joke ) ... the upper cake on the left has a Bettie Page frosting on it ?
According to the county 's land development code , which was amended in 2012 , a landmark is an archaeological or historical site or structure as designated by specific criteria .
The value of the location attribute of a element is a hint .
Just about every formulation of Bayer® aspirin has a shelf life of 36 months ( an exception being that company 's Low Dose 81 product , which is good for only 24 months ) .
At the end of the list of training / bonuses you can choose upon gaining a level is the option , " Whatever : If the GM allows it , it 's legal " .
Not only did he actually make a living being a cartoonist , he made it look glamorous .
Some of her lines are so crazy and absurd-making sure she was n't a parody was a challenge .
Although some teachers regard their profession as a calling as well as a career , a school is the workplace for teachers and other staff and , as such , is covered by standard safety guidelines should an injury at work occur .
It is also clear that some campers are carrying knives and axes onto the moor which I would have thought is a criminal offence and remember that if tyres are being slashed then a knife is the tool to do it with .
For others , a retreat is a regular part of their spiritual practice .
The half-life of a drug is a way of measuring the length of time it takes for the quantity in the average person 's blood to drop by half .
A proportion is a special type of ratio in that it must lie between 0 and 1 .
Notice that the ' outcome ' in the first table of the module has been replaced by whether a subject is a case or a control .
An Engine is any ingenious and useful artefact .
In that sense a product such as an assembler was a good step forward .
The trouble with setting up a course is this .
Unfortunately Rupe Silver was a guy was a little bit , slightly miscued when he was born I would think , he had kind of a little hump on his back and it is said that they 'd never book him on the number one halls because of his stature , he did n't look out very well but he was a good act .
Such a spot is the island-town of Brantôme , in the valley of the Dronne-none more idyllic to be found throughout Perigord .
Ben Burbidge , managing director of Burbidge comments : " Choosing sophisticated palettes of neutrals in a kitchen is a great way to add depth and contrast .
An example is a contract completed in 1931 at Montevideo .
I simply cannot believe this course is not ranked higher up the list - being below Worplesdon for a start is a joke ( even ' funnier ' as the initial review on this website states Worplesdon as the best of the 3 W 's , when it is inferior to the other 2 ) .
Such a convulsion is the struggle of gradual suffocation , as in drowning ; and , in the original Opium Confessions , I mentioned a case of that nature communicated by me by a lady from her own childish experience .
The radius of curvature ( R ) of a lens is the radius of the sphere with a surface curvature matching that of the face of the lens .
The thickness ( d ) of a lens is the distance between the center of the two faces .
A bit is a binary digit - that is , it is something whose value can be a 0 or a 1 .
" Visiting a school is a delight for me , " Jasper said , " I love talking about my writing and artwork , and enjoy the enthusiasm of the children .
Describing the life cycle of an organism is an example of a skill demonstrated by fourth graders at the proficient level .
Being rich and having a degree is a better reason to look at him askance in this context than if he 'd had a record of housebreaking .
A game is a framework involving two or more players where each player 's success is determined not only by his own strategy , but by the strategies of all the other players in the game .
A strategy is a complete plan of action for a player that explains how he will behave .
Finally let 's assume that the result of a wolf fighting a wolf or a rabbit fighting a rabbit is a 50 / 50 toss up where each player 's expected winnings are half a point .
From looking at the payoff matrix , it becomes clear that building a wolf is the strictly dominant strategy .
If that occurs , breaking the club record of 97 losses in a season is a definite possibility .
Again the only thing holding back such a solution is a vendor wide approach to an honest and open definition of how they calculate ' visitors ' .
But a forum is a big deal with lots of extra work and responsibility on my part .
I think a forum is a good idea , but it would need structure .
We 've flirted with a stop at Clarke of the Karoo during our two-day visit here , but as yet have n't managed more than at least three drive-bys , so we pull in to a parking lot already filling up with cars ( restaurants should take note that parking a couple of cars outside a venue is a sure draw card to passers by ) by now desperate for a hot cuppa something .
For the other twenty-six million or so businesses in this country , planning is vital and a pitch is an excellent part of the planning process , not a replacement for it .
But , like you said , if a vaporizer is all it takes . .
How big a problem is this ?
A business is a name for a mechanism for selling .
Removing a dam is no small project ; in fact this one is nearly 30 years in the making .
' Equating the Lord 's Supper with a snack was a humorous way for my professor to introduce what he was trying to communicate , but in truth that understanding was not a far-off stretch from what many of my friends and classmates believed , including myself .
Now , I know what you 're thinking : " How can wine that 's only $ 2 a bottle be any good ?
For instance , adding a speech bubble to someone who is talking during a video is an easy way to add additional content to what they 're already discussing .
The inescapable conclusion is that the freer an economy is the more prosperous it is .
When you edit your room , you can make an object be the room entry , meaning new visitors to the room will land there at first .
An ethical sympathy in an artist is an unpardonable mannerism of style ...
They consist chiefly of foundry-men , are skilled artisans , and as a body are a very respectable set of men .
On the whole the prevailing opinion in this district is that the iron-workers as a body are a better class of man than the average collier .
The Allah Who makes a thing into an object is the Allah Who created us all from something objective in nature-a clot of blood .
Such a condition is a proof of ability to comprehend the Divine Command behind each object we meet .
Confessions of a Eurosceptic is an elegant memoir that outlines his euroscepticism but also touched with personal and family tragedy .
" A hypocrite is the kind of politician who would cut down a redwood tree , then mount the stump and make a speech for conservation .
Like humans , the cards enjoy being touched , in contact with each other ; the best example of such a spread is The Opening Of The Key spread ( OOTK ) .
The value of a good is a necessary consequence of the knowledge that the maintenance of one 's life and well-being depends upon the control and use of that particular good .
In addition to a valuer for whom a thing is a value , other prerequisites of human value are an end to which the value is a means and man 's life as an end in itself ( i.e. , a final end that is not a means to a further end ) .
A need is a condition whose presence improves a person 's ability to survive or flourish or whose absence hinders that ability .
To attribute the complex problem of totalitarianism simply to external factors and the evil character of a dictator was a simple and hard-hitting tactic - but it did not reveal the profound roots of this tragedy .
The little space he has for a brain is all left sided anyway .
A compromise is the definition of types within a custom company-wide library with good clear documentation provided for all to follow .
This , of course , accounts for the relative scarcity in English of works examining otaku in any particular depth-simply conceptualising the parameters for such a study is a daunting task , given the potential for the term to spill into a seemingly boundless critique of contemporary Japan .
An example is the use of sandwich products such as insulation bonded to fibre glass mesh bonded to a polymer render finish ( Figure 5.21 . ) .
These benefits include a theoretical framework which rests firmly on elementary principles of cognitive psychology , but perhaps the most important attraction for a linguist is the possibility of facing uncertainty and complication in the data without feeling obliged to arrive at a single coherent and complete analysis .
As the level of information which requires to be supplied with an application is to be related to whether a development is a national development , a major development or a local development we would again wish to see clarification of how this will work in practice if telecommunications development is classed in one category but dealt with in another .
� He then clarified that this stipulation was identical in Bashkir and federal law , before commenting : �If a person is a teacher , then let him teach , if a missionary , then let him get permission from his mission centre or leadership and come here .
They also thought an albatross was a reincarnation of a sailor washed overboard and it was thought very unlucky to kill one .
A photon is a single particle of light .
A score is a hugely powerful weapon , but not when it 's being used every five minutes and advertising three albums of film-related music , like some of Smith 's more mainstream films .
A talent is a measure of money - and money in vast amounts .
Any appliance that is left 10 years without a service is a death trap .
Taking a biopsy is a routine procedure which is either painless or causes only slight discomfort .
" For a 14 - year-old to win and give the younger brigade a stone was some achievement .
Point taken :) I remember when i was young i was looking at some mission 733 floorstanders and was having a listen is some high end shop .
This sheet is similar to Function Machines Level 2 ( one operation ) , but it tries to show how the numbers in a table are the same as from a function machine through the evolution of diagrams .
A lease is a legally binding commitment for a certain number of years and usually that term must run its course .
A polyp is a fleshy growth on the inside of the bowel .
However Monty Roberts kept our feet on the ground and asked us to remember the old adage that in the end " A horse is a horse is a horse " ... and when you see the prices that top dressage horses are fetching at the performance sales its worth remembering that !
Based in Mailla in the Philipines where £ 60 a month is a decent wage for 11 hours per day .
; Prillwitz , J. ( 2010 ) " A holiday is a holiday ' : practicing sustainability , home and away ' .
Therefore , there is a gap-that is a fair point .
The registration of a death is an example of something that might require face-to-face interaction , but will people still have to go in person to arrange a registration of marriage and to pay for that ?
For example , the individuals who we will consider in relation to an offence are those whose modus operandi has been a certain course of activity that may have led to their conviction and subsequent imprisonment .
Gerry Brown : Stewart Stevenson raised the issue of when a person is an adult .
By far the most natural-seeming cause of a disease is a virus .
Phobias A phobia is an irrational and intense fear of a situation or object .
" Being an advisor was a challenge but it was one step removed from the thing I was good at , " he reflects .
It was contended by the defendant that an assault was the doing of act which intentionally or recklessly caused another to apprehend immediate and unlawful violence ; that the evidence was that the victim had not been caused to have such apprehension ; and that there was no evidence upon which the Justices could say that the defendant had intended she should so apprehend .
An assault is an act by which the defendant intentionally or recklessly causes the complainant to apprehend immediate , or to sustain , unlawful personal violence . .
" My Father was a good man but he was n't at all supportive , he felt that anybody who was a musician was a druggie .
I thought a folly was a building constructed primarily for decoration , but either suggesting by its appearance some other purpose , or merely so extravagant that it transcends the normal range of garden ornaments or other class of building to which it belongs .
Half an eye is half as good as a whole eye , and it 's better than nothing .
People all over the planet would still think that a day is a day .
Also raising a smile is the provision of JVC 's DynaPix image processing engine , which includes elements targeted at automatic colour management ; MPEG noise reduction to clean up grubby digital broadcasts ; and the addition of extra image detail .
Enterprise Information Systems - Key to the effective use of IT within an organisation is the ability to analyse the business and be able to assess the IT needs to support the business strategy .
A pvr is a hard drive recorder mostly now with two freeview tuners but no dvd recorder .
A trust is a legal relationship which exists between the settlor , the beneficiaries and the trustees .
So , what kind of a leader is this ?
Ok a priority is a CF or some may argue even two .
Whether an individual is a non - UK resident or a non - UK ordinarily resident depends on a number of factors , including frequency and duration of visits to the UK , the reasons for visiting and his / her connections to the UK including family , property , work or social connections .
First , it 's my understanding that the albedo of a body is the fraction of irradiation falling on that body that is reflected .
A sun is a star at the centre of a solar system .
13.6 In this circumstance , the zone of influence of a site is that area which would experience impacts from any mineral or waste activity on that site .
A share is a part ownership of a company .
A mortgage is a loan specifically for the purchase of property .
Who knows and why now should n't such a situation be all of the above and more ?
" A bit is a funda-mental unit of information , represented as a 0 or 1 in a normal digital computer .
Hence a reporter is a journalist but a journalist need not be a reporter .
Repton also made runs quickly in spite of a slow outfield and steady bowling ; a draw was a fair result .
I am not a Buddhist is an individual through Buddhism and its principles seen from the point of view of one on the path .
This contactbetween GAD and a company was an importantpart of the scrutiny process .
Travelling to South Africa with other Goldsmiths PhD candidates , representing the Sociology department , as well as the Postgraduate Interdisciplinary Reading Group on HIV and Innovation , and presenting a paper was a momentous experience .
Oil as an industry is a good simile in fact .
One question for which Bandolier has found a hint of an answer is the old chestnut about compliance and the number of times a day we have to take the tablets .
To provide such an experience is a proper aim for a school Dramatic Society .
1.4.3 An Ordinance is a further definition , clarification or stipulation of existing powers , as prescribed by Acts of Parliament .
{ A hologram is a holographic photograph of a three-dimensional object , printed on two-dimensional paper , which appears to exist in three-dimensional space .
Personally I would go for A / C , one of the most imporant parts of a holiday is a good night 's sleep .
Plus , how much of a burden is the sector willing to bear ?
A : Since an inquest is an inquiry the Coroner collects the evidence and receives reports and statements .
A manuscript is a magical little world into which we peer .
The reason is that any decision for a girl relating to abortion is , as Mr Havers correctly contends , likely to be more difficult and more demanding than decisions on , for example , treatment for sexually transmitted diseases and contraception because an abortion is an intrusive surgical intervention which cannot be reversed .
He stresses that a parent , rather than any third party , is responsible for the welfare of the young person under the age of 16 and so he contends that it follows that a parent is the best person for guiding and advising a young person of that age .
" The company 's concept of the smallest possible cleanroom with an isolator is a very persuasive one " , emphasised Dr Norbert Bühler , Plant Manager of Pomdor 's Sursee facility in Switzerland .
A politician wearing a uniform and holding a gun is a very dangerous politician .
( A sphere is the ideal store shape , or hemisphere if there will be good insulation above . ) The cost of the boreholes would be quite significant - round here the people that do it are a bit specialist = expensive .
A gun is a tool , simple as that .
First of all , that it 's a bit of a nightmare being an online retailer .
Unusually AVT always request that the control room of an installation is the first area to be completed as this enables the engineers to continue the installation whilst the building is progressing .
Although an aerotow is a different proposition , the principles are remarkably similar .
" Corpus is a collection of all the writing of a particular kind or by a particular person " ( Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English , 1995:308 1995:308 ) and a concordancer is a software program , which analyses corpora and lists the results .
Under section 362 ( 2 ) of the Act , the provider of the service for the purposes of holding a licence is the person with general control over which programmes are comprised in the service .
Their words had a double meaning Any acceptance of a mistake is a step in the right direction .
The fold on a webpage is the part of the screen that your fans have to scroll down to view .
An example is a football game or theatre performance - where , if anything , the more people who are enjoying or watching the performance , the greater the enjoyment of each person .
No less an attraction was the Midland Game Fair at Weston Park in mid September which enjoyed good weather and the last gasp attraction of being the final big fair of the season .
And , of course , America in a sense is the least of the three entities to be involved with the Islamic world , despite citizens like myself , and it 's very recent and so you did n't address that and I wondered what you would say about that , that maybe this epoch that we 're in is reminiscent of the early 80 s and , moreover , the Islamic element .
The fact that the person making a request is a competitor cannot be taken into account when considering whether to disclose , because ' company ' is an ' individual ' under the act and cannot be questioned as to why they want the information .
Getting together with your family , friends or colleagues and enjoying cakes and a coffee was a very enjoyable way of helping us raise the money we need to reach more people affected by cancer .
Both Attwood and McDevitt have both appeared to rule this out , but a month is a long time in politics .
A camera , a computer and an idea are all that is needed to start making films .
There is an unwritten rule that the more popular and well known a place is the better and more worthwhile it is to visit .
Mark 3:35 3:35 - How can we tell if a person is a true Christian ?
Nevertheless a conspiracy is a very difficult plot to pull off .
A conspiracy is an orgy of the lie ... and there are very many professional liars involved in this scam .
How a queen was a cat .
A kilowatt running for an hour is a kilowatt-hour .
Writing a book is a long , slow , hard slog for the most ephemeral and capricious of rewards at the end .
In particular , encountering a divergent understanding of a concept is a challenge to defend ones own view , or to accept that your understanding is faulty .
Quilt of Belonging : Stitching Together the Stories of a Nation is a children 's book , popular with parents and teachers .
These ever-ready sources of energy often make the quickest and easiest late-night dinners -- eggs over-easy on buttered toast or stuffed into a bagel are the go-to choices for a satisfying snack .
A banana is a bit of a freaky eat in that it keeps your skin nice and elastic .
Choosing an island is both fun and easy .
An example is the song ' Yamuna Gan Thera ' sung by Nanda Malini .
He has been out of action for a long time and fighting Watson in his return from such a layoff is a tough task .
Mask induction ( Fig 2 ) with the bird restrained by the Elizabethan hold ( Fig 3 ) in a towel is the most common method .
I like the fact that a webzine is an enjoyable read , even if you do n't play the game it 's designed to support .
A session is a collection of one or more process groups .
In the world of finance , a building is an abstract entity , an asset that can be bought and sold along with other assets as a portfolio .
So , even in terms of administration , if a constituency is a district on its own , it is better off than that constituency which is sharing the same DC with two other constituencies .
We get Kshs 11 million allocated to the district to be used on roads and you realise that the two constituencies will share the Kshs 11 million , whereas in the case where a constituency is a district , the entire Kshs 11 million is allocated to that constituency alone .
" A cynic is a man who knows the price of everything , and the value of nothing ...
An apology is a way to take responsibility , to signal a change , and to assure the world that it wo n't happen again .
For most North American and European humans eating a meal is a pretty simple affair : get some food from the cupboard , heat it up , and eat .
Such an uptake is a luxury intake .
A coronoid is a substance that is manufactured by plants but not by animals and are responsible for all the crazy colors that come with fruits and vegetables .
The best proxy for the stock markets as a whole is the flagship S & P 500 stock index ( SPX ) .
The best proxy for commodities as a group is the Continuous Commodity Index ( CCI ) , today 's version of the celebrated classic CRB .
She also thinks a sign is a wonderful idea and a distinct possibility .
A mass , assemblage , or sum of particulars ; as , a house is an aggregate of stone , brick , timber , etc. » In an aggregate the particulars are less intimately mixed than in a compound 2 . ...
Many people think that working in a bank is a case of sitting on your till behind you piece of glass and take the customers money or give the customer money , this is not the case .
One unit an hour is the only safe limit , but even then ; there are plenty of studies showing how , even below the limit judgement is seriously impaired .
It is incredible to realize that gold stocks as a sector are a much better fundamental bargain today than tech stocks !
" An island is an area of land completely surrounded by water " .
Another resident said : " A cafe is a totally stupid idea , St James Barton is already surrounded by cafes .
But a website is a business and advertisers pay by results so the quality of those visits is actually more important than the quantity .
If you wish to control the dilution ratio then using a concentrate is a good idea .
An example is the company 's acquisition of the Dzus brand which considerably broadened its range of quarter-turn quick access / quick release products which offer advantages to both OEM and end user .
Calling yourself a designer is a title in my book that should be earned , so go college do it properly and show most of the people here how to design .
So rich a pudding is this chapter that more could be done with the issues , particularly to connect up specific issues with particular types of information role or responsibility .
Even though Private Hire vehicles are required to have a number of official stickers , generally from the rear view the only thing that differentiates them from a car is a small license plate usually located below bumper height .
Being a mother is the most important thing so I want to focus on that .
In all probability it could not be financed and would require the printing presses to run , and drive hyper inflation , which as a solution is a bit like curing an ant infestation by burning your house down .
Charged with getting accruals accounting into the civil service , they spent years puzzling over whether something like a road or a submarine was an asset or a liability , and came out with answers which enabled numbers to be compiled but did n't always entirely make practical sense .
Stereotype [ disambiguation ] A stereotype is a simplified generalization about members of a group .
Stereotype A stereotype is a popular belief about specific types of individuals .
Abbott also contended that to bring back a character is a sign of desperation .
Another noise I do n't like on a campsite is a tv .
They were thrashed last year , but a year is a long time and Spa is unpredictable if the weather is as bad as it has been most of this summer .
But how right he is - a son is a son no matter the nationality and grief ( also sensitively illustrated ) knows no frontiers .
The first thing that you need to find out about a dentist is the kind of successes that he has had so far in dealing with dental cases .
That was a season were the politics were worse ( the FISA / FOCA war ) 9 cars started at Imola ( FOCA walked out ) , Ferrari drivers took team orders into their own hands .
Finishing third when your top scorer has about half a dozen is an impressive achievement .
But just because an agent is a member of ARLA does n't mean that they wo n't make a complete dog 's breakfast of things so it 's not a total safety net .
So now the closest dino to a bird is this little guy Coelosaurus or whatever .
Assemblage An assemblage is a word used by archaeologists to describe a group of objects that have been found together .
Assemblage [ archaeology ] An assemblage is an archaeological term meaning a group of different artifacts found in association with one another , that is , in the same context .
As defined by one of the standard contemporary archaeological textbooks ( Renfrew and Bahn ) , an assemblage is a " group of artifacts ...
assemblage An assemblage is a sculpture constructed from found objects .
So a liger is a male lion and a female tiger , while a tigon is a male lion and a female tiger , I think .
Sorry , I meant that a liger was a hybrid produced from a male lion and a female tiger , while a tigon is a hybrid of a male tiger and a female lion .
A chimera is an animal that has two or more different populations of genetically distinct cells that originated in different zygotes ( zygote is the fused egg and sperm ) .
They nodded but I knew they had no idea of what lay ahead , for the death of a parent is an event for which there is no preparation .
An agent is the servant of the landlord , not his master ( although some do behave like one !
In Reykjavik the price of a pint is the price of a brewery in Skopje .
An action is a person 's intentional doing of something .
An action is an event , and like other events , can be picked out various descriptions .
It 's consistent with this , though , to suppose that in the typical case what generates the relations of dependency among the different things done in an action is the causal order of the ensuing effects .
The difference between an average performer and a superstar is that person 's ability to plan ahead !
A bore is a person who opens his mouth and puts his feats in it .
A pellicle is a thin sheen or skin of denatured proteins that , when it drys out a bit , becomes tacky .
For one , it appealingly suggests that successful use of a name is a matter of having a piece of knowledge ( namely , knowledge that a certain property is possessed by one and only one object ) .
A designator is an expression that designates something .
In a certain sense , a company is a vehicle of collective self-determination just like any other association in modern society - people establish lasting relations of trust and collaboration in order to make a living together .
An utterance is any action in the doing of which the agent meansnn something .
Secondly , a number of the parameters that are flags had values of ' * ' in the original catalog ; the HEASARC in some cases has changed these values to other symbols because an asterisk is a wild-card character in its database systems .
How can it be argued that someone , whose idea of a wood is a set of lines on the map and a sheaf of words and statistics , knows better how to work with it than someone who walks it and tends the paths , respecting the byeways ?
Since a horse is a ride-in-motion bringing a video camera is not a good idea .
Every man who dies for an idea is a martyr , for in him the aspirations of the spirit have triumphed over the fears of the animal .
Such a decree is the accomplishment of a complete religious { 66 } revolution , it is the inauguration of the reign of the Holy Ghost upon the earth .
Filling a tin stocking ornament with a little greenery and hanging it on a knob is a such an easy way to add a festive detail .
C. CHARACTERISTICS A proverb is a short pithy saying .
One asset in the Audit of a fact is the amount of knowledge which it covers .
The arrival of Michael 's abusive stepfather was almost a relief-here was the molester we 'd so frequently asked after , and now all of a sudden one of the four kids seemed fast-tracked for disaster .
A ball is a ball and a strike is a strike !!!
Also , pitchers intentionally throw balls , so the assumption that a ball is a " miss " is incorrect .
The extension of a predicate is the group of objects that that predicate is true of .
An action is a doing of something for a reason .
An action is an intentional doing of something .
Now , a wish is a propositional attitude .
For example , a flute is a wind instrument .
The big event that comes to mind when first considering a horse is a wedding .
Emma Goldman knew that a revolution without a groove was a disaster waiting to happen .
On some days sustaining a conversation was an effort .
That window gave Dan time to put Skype for Mac 2.8 betea through its paces and decide that a screencast was the best angle for him to take with the story ; it also gave him time to assemble a thoughtful and illuminating video .
" A hot-box , " began the Compound , picking and choosing her words as though they were coal , " a hotbox is the penalty exacted from inexperience by haste .
An ontology is a representation of a set of concepts within a domain , and will aim to clarify relationships between concepts .
When a minute is a mile , action is quick .
Such a project is a halfway house to becoming an institution ; actually , it is neither social movement nor institution .
In general , the rules and norms of an institution are the special or particular principles of the ideal which the institution serves .
A firm is a project whose mission is the expansion of the proportion of social labour ( i.e. , value ) it subsumes and generally operates a regime of uncompromising top-down dictatorship worthy of the most byzantine authoritarian dictatorship .
In this sense a firm is a project like any other .
The diagonal of a matrix are the elements that have identical row and column numbers .
The transpose of a row is a column , and the transpose of a column is a row .
A scalar multiplied by a matrix is a conventional way of indicating that EVERY element of the matrix is multiplied by the number .
( The inverse of a product is the product of the inverses in reverse order .
To approach this beautiful organic growth with this bloody butcher 's cleaver of a document is an unforgivable travesty .
What had struck Gemmy as a student was the way that the chestnut tree refused to leave the Appalachian landbase , even when it could only hang on as a shadow of its former self , a two - or three-foot shrub in the forests where it had been a giant .
Answer : A weddingmoon is an out-of-town wedding at a Sandals all-inclusive resort in the Caribbean that combines a wedding and honeymoon .
Thus , under the Revolution as under the ancien régime , the same conception of sovereignty as the " absolute and eternal power " of a republic is the source of all the rights and duties of the citizen .
Bill on 12 / 05 / 98 at 00:00 00:00 ( 002521 ) An Aircast is a removable cast that has 4 air pockets that can be inflated .
And , let 's face it : preparing what is essentially the same " Holiday Meal " twice in a month is a bit boring .
An Individual is the person engaged in an online transaction .
An athlete is an athlete and some people can play in whatever situation they are in .
A divorce is a very serious decision , and using it as a weapon or method of control creates anxiety and despair .
( c ) The agency requires the claimant to submit the claim to a court because the agency determined that a court is the appropriate forum for the adjudication of the claim because of the nature or complexity of the claim .
( 83 ) " Wharf Certification " means a written certification from the Department that a structure is a wharf as defined in ORS 780.040 and as used in these rules .
A permission is a capability on an RBAC resource .
He would have considered that every household owning a house was a success of his policy , even though all underwriting standards were discarded .
" People who own a superyacht are the elite of the elite .
People who own a superyacht are the elite of the elite .
I guess " a buck is a buck " was too much for him and the rest of his Bay Street buddies to take .
The 2000 calorie eating plan prepare boundaries a person 's every day consumption of meals to 2000 calories .
But remember , a family is the best defence against all the shit the world throws at you , even if they are terminally uncool .
By definition , a cliché is a saying , expression , or , in this case , an idea that has been overused to the point that it loses its original meaning or effect .
Completing a film is a Herculean task-especially for independent filmmakers .
An artifact is a page element that is n't read by a screen reader .
Choose a type from the drop-down list ( a comment is a type of annotation ) .
Among her great strengths as a director were an excellent use of lighting and the grouping of her actors to form stage pictures which eloquently underlined the playwright 's intentions .
" What kind of a war is this for heaven 's sake ?
I knew it would take a while for the jobbing to happen but a year is an awfully long time .
A cellgroup is the set of three adjacent cells surrounded by red lines in Figure 1 .
So when they look at what political parties have to offer , and they see Labour people like you who make whether or not a person is a bigot the most important takeaway thing in the whole fucking discussion they roll their eyes and say " ah yeah , no thanks .
Your obsession with painting anyone who wants to discuss the sexuality of Grant Robertson ( as part of the over-all message Labour needs to send to the electorate ) as a bigot is a graphic example as to why Labours phone is off the hook with so many New Zealanders .
Maybe a dictator is the solution .
Hong Kong has autonomy from China , but not in foreign policy matters , and whether or not China allows the U.S. to persecute someone who is in effect a dissident is a foreign policy matter .
The easier a plan is the more likely you are to stick with it .
Nihilism is an extremely common trope across all types of fiction - seeing something so commonplace as a nod to such a microgenre is a sign of a pretty shallow reference pool , frankly .
Unique to California and Virginia , a demurrer is a sort of motion to dismiss in which a defendant argues lack of merits for the case .
A treaty is a formal , written agreement between sovereign states or between states and international organizations .
It is clearly stated in the legislation that a child is a person under 18 years of age .
By my reckoning , a head is an appendage .
Honoring your rights as a creator is a fundamental aspect of Deep Blue 's support of your work and the University 's mission of creating knowledge .
A cask is a barrel " formed of curved staves bound together by hoops , with flat ends or ' heads ' " ( Oxford English Dictionary ) , and like a walnut because it is round and wooden .
A farthing ( as in " a farthing porringer of husky chips of potato " ) was an English coin worth a quarter of a penny ( OED ) ; and a porringer is a rough bowl usually used to contain liquid foods - soup , porridge , etc. ( OED ) .
A rate is the base price for insurance and the premium or amount that you pay for the insurance coverage purchased .
An allele is a genetic marker .
Having sufficient power when you are away from an outlet is a crucial factor for any portable computer .
In truth , a violation is a violation .
Status Damage - A status is a detrimental effect upon your character .
A truss is a truss .
Deborah Klein ( DK ) : A food is a SuperFood when it provides you with a significant health benefit when eaten on a regular basis .
Deputy John Paul Phelan referred to a case where a teacher was a day late in registering with the Teaching Council and was forced to wait for Garda vetting .
Treating skilled teachers as a priority is the way to improve the education system .
A therapist is an objective third party with no emotional attachment and at times , that is exactly what a child needs .
Such a jumble is the logical result of our illogic-and we might say , of the ills of the age .
Another consideration when choosing a destination is the specific approach to weight loss .
I do n't think a type is the worst thing in the world , but you sure do n't want to have more than two or three .
Unfortunately , for many of those starry-eyed hardball lovers , a glimpse is all they 're likely to get , as recent years have found the Sox saddled with a greater curse than anything " the Bambino " could 've dreamed up : the curse of popularity .
Many of the obstacles that wound and even cripple a marriage are a direct result of a faulty definition of marriage .
What makes it a fantasy is the bizarre ambience of the citadel of Gormenghast , located in a time and place that remain unclear , claustrophobically closed in on itself , and just slightly askew .
A VAT is a consumption tax which is levied at each stage of production based on the value added to the product at that stage .
It 's not often you read about the temperature of a resort being a key selling point , but in this case , it 's definitely a big factor .
About Quips A Quip is a brief member contribution for which we do n't have room in our Answers to Questions or Fat Friday newsletters .
Diets that limit carbohydrate consumption from 0 -100 grams of carbohydrates a day are a popular way to meet weight loss goals .
To be a lawyer is a success .
Owning a boxer is a joy - acquiring one demands a true commitment to the physical and emotional health of the dog .
One of the primary characteristics that must be taken into account when considering a boxer is the high energy level common to the breed .
I prefer to use the term ' undesirable ' over words like ' bad ' because ' bad ' implies that an animal is that way by choice or of his own making rather than as a result of human interaction .
Bye the way , a solution is the method or process of solving a problem .
my fiance 's house is covered in damp upstairs , they rent their house and it has NO double glazing and NO central heating , the only room with a fire is the living room , the rest of the house is freezing , they have begged and begged for something to be done , but they wont do anything !!!
The group calculated that a mile was the equivalent of 4,500 bounces , which they managed to achieve in two hours at the Driftwood Spars pub in St Agnes .
SIR - An aftermath is a second growth of grass in a meadow that has been mown .
I think what makes you mad in a manual is the vey action of gear changing etc when you have been cut up or whatever .
Breaking into MotoGP - the Formula One of bike racing - and making a mark is the target of most rising stars , and Lowes is no different .
The Head teacher , Tina Jackson should be dismissed , any person who is so screwed up to think banning a bun is a good idea should not be allowed anywhere near impressionable children let alone be in charge of a school .
He said : " We could have done with the win but a draw was a fair result , although Penryn and Illogan will be the happier teams .
A friend was a claims investigator who went to someones house to followup on a £ 1000 claim for perished frozen food .
An aggregate is an array or a class ( Clause 9 ) with no user-provided constructors ( 12.1 ) , no brace-or-equal-initializers for non-static data members ( 9.2 ) , no private or protected non-static data members ( Clause 11 ) , no base classes ( Clause 10 ) , and no virtual functions ( 10.3 ) .
The successful survival of a viral pathogen in a host is a complex process and involves many pathogen-host interactions .
All it takes to form a co-op is a small group of determined people all set on an idea to cooperatively own and operate a facet of the economy and allow them to make decisions in a democratic process .
Now , I said the third ingredient in a system is the capacity of individuals to provide for their needs by the use of the social and cultural equipment provided to them by the system .
Can a doughnut be a drug ?
But Senator Grassley himself opposes the estate tax , in large part because he thinks that while a decision to keep or sell an asset is an appropriate trigger for a tax , death should not be .
In a Hindu majority state , till recently a Muslim was the president of the state and currently a member of the Sikh minority community is the prime minister .
Damn all in a bucket of bromine , ideally I should n't have to be taught this , but this discussion has made it abundantly clear that yet another privilege I enjoy as a male is the freedom to be blunt .
A stage is a round of golf and after 4 of them , they crown a winner and move on to the next scenic venue .
While pausing at the doorway , the writer says that people used to think that a cat was the Devil in disguise .
In more simple terms , a salt is a bit of additional data which makes your hashes significantly more difficult to crack .
And any discussion of the natural class of unnatural categorizations should mention Borges ' celebrated discussion of " El Idioma Analítico de John Wilkins " -- discussed in Language Log here -- as well as Suzanne Briet 's widely-cited analysis of when an antelope is a document .
We also think putting a face to a name is a good branding strategy .
500 million pageviews a month is an amazing accomplishment .
A chair is a kind of supporter with carrying capacity 1 .
A mandal is an administrative unit comprising of about 30 -40 villages and an average population of about 50,000 .
A calendar is a very important tool in most people 's lives , so when using an app for calendar management it 's important that it makes this task as easy as possible .
Right now , I want to organise another event but the issue of a venue is a major impediment .
A system is a growing organism .
A slope is a slope , get involved and lets hope Gloucester gets bought by the ' right ' people and goes from strength to strength .
The first thing is you should never forget before purchasing a watch is the warranty offered by the dealer .
There is a place for planning , but I always feel that a plan is a somewhat hypothetical thing .
For tell me , he said , what result is there of computation or geometry , in the same sense as a house is the result of building , or a garment of weaving , or any other work of any other art ?
One suspects that watching such a game is a bit like playing it in it : If you do n't limber up properly , you can seriously damage yourself over the course of 90 strenuous minutes .
It has really got me down and some days i feel so depressed and im sure loads of other ladies feel the same in the first few weeks - being a mummy is a magical experience but its also very overwhelming and you need to be able to talk to someone .
A book is a secret place in which you can find your own secret places ' " .
The prospects for the success of such an effort were the subject of hard argument .
As a result it actually does n't matter if a newspaper is a little out of date , provided the journalists have done their jobs properly .
SCULLY : You could know a person 's every thought .
Then again he 's 60 this year , which as a drummer is a pretty ripe age .
If a section of an article is a magnet for unhelpful contributions ( such as the " external links " section or trivia sections ) , be aware that while moving it to another article may help to clean up the main article , it creates a new article that consists entirely of a section for unwanted contributions .
The requirements I wanted in a license were this , you may use the source code but if you modify that source code you must make your source code available .
An earthquake is the sudden movement of the ground that releases elastic energy stored in rocks and generates seismic waves .
A fault is a large fracture in rocks , across which the rocks have moved .
" A loan is an issue of Government paper which entails an obligation to pay interest amounting to a percentage of the total sum of the borrowed money .
It is a fact that if there is one thing that is the most enduring in this world and the most meritorious in the Hereafter , it is guidance ; and therefore a guide is the most valuable person .
At whatever level it occurs , guidance is the most valued among the duties of servanthood , provided it is done purely for God 's sake ; and any hero of truth who fulfills such a responsibility is a guide who is an heir to the Prophet , upon him be peace and blessings .
A guide is a hero of spirituality , one who is a careful student of the Qur ' an and the book of the universe , and one who has an inquiring mind which has an acquaintance with existential mysteries .
A guide is a wise one equipped with the necessary knowledge of both religious and certain secular sciences to discuss different subjects with an audience and present satisfactory solutions to their problems .
A habit is a pattern your brain makes to increase the efficiency of actions that are done a lot .
It shares characteristics with earlier debates in the development of medicine , law , and engineering ; it reflects the conflict about whether a professional is an elitist or an expert ; and it includes locus-of-control issues , with control of the field ranging between free-market forces and government control .
Bring us up to 1500 a month is an additional 600 a month times the number of persons on PWD .
I am not sure that a modifier is the way to go .
A book is a mirror : If an ass peers into it , you ca n't expect an apostle to look out .
The most foolish kind of a book is a kind of leaky boat on the sea of wisdom ; some of the wisdom will get in anyhow .
A woman is the only thing I am afraid of that I know will not hurt me .
A fault is a crack across which the rocks have been offset .
A stanine is an abbreviated version of the percentile .
An eighteenth-century writer thus defined the state prison : " A bastille is any house solidly built , hermetically sealed , and diligently guarded , where any person , of whatever rank , age , or sex , may enter without knowing why , remain without knowing how long , hoping to leave it , but not knowing how .
Typing at a keyboard on a desk is a common work posture for many computer users .
" We want to show that the once supposedly great leader of a nation was a thief , " Zarko Korac told reporters .
A battlestar 's no place to raise a family .
@ BobRodes : I 'm obviously in the minority here on ELL , but so far as I 'm concerned this answer is hopelessly misleading , in that it starts off by saying " an invalid is a person with a disability " .
But to most people , an invalid is a ( usually , old , frequently bed-ridden ) person enfeebled by chronic illness / poor health .
But ' Odyssee ' as a whole is no K.C. rip-off-it also moves in a similar area as that of Pulsar ( hypnotic space ) .
The idea that pharmacy practice is at a crossroads is a tired cliché in the profession , but I 'm seeing the retail component of the profession deciding between one of two paths : One path will involve retail pharmacists , supported by pharmacy regulators , taking greater responsibility for their own profession and professional standards .
( Pilling a rabbit is no fun - they have huge tongues and are super at spitting out pills . ) We recently needed a special lasix formulation for an elderbun with end-stage heart failure .
On his television show The 700 Club , Pat Robertson declares : " I am absolutely persuaded one of the reasons so many lesbians are at the forefront of the pro-choice movement is because being a mother is the unique characteristic of womanhood , and these lesbians will never be mothers naturally , so they do n't want anybody else to have that privilege either .
In ordnance terms , a fuze is that part of an artillery projectile which detonates the explosive charge .
The tulku in Gomo 's name refers to his status-according to Tibetan tradition , a tulku is the reincarnation of a recently deceased high lama , " recognized " as a young boy through a mystical process of omens and visions .
A relationship is a different thing .
I would suppose that a niche is the category or tipic that you write about .
Further , Reliance acknowledged at the bad faith hearing that it thought an offset was an affirmative defense .
One of the issues for the University as a whole is the issue of data custodianship , whether we 're talking about scholarly information and knowledge or the data that the University uses to do its business - like HR data and student data and so on ...
An apple is an apple regardless of how it has been grown , the USDA food pyramid suggests , and the only take-home message is that we should all be eating more apples and less added sugars and fats .
A dialect is a regional variety of a language that has a different pronunciation , vocabulary , or meaning .
A chirograph was a useful way of recording agreements made between two people , for it provided each with a copy of the document and in addition acted as a safeguard against forgery or fraud .
The making of a palimpsest was a common and thrifty practice : the original writing here has been erased with pumice but traces of it are visible near the bottom and quite clearly legible under ultraviolet light .
Alec , a baseline is a baseline is a baseline 1961 -1990 is commonly used by climate scientists for historical reasons .
On the other hands , when a thing is an important subject for analysis and not a bit of a stretch , one should easily find other works with other base temperatures .
Among Native Americans , a shaman is a medicine man who is also a religious leader , i.e. , both physician and priest .
" An enemy is a person whose story we have not heard , " and this by , sorry , a guy who does work in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
An ohm is a term of physics and is a measure of electrical resistance .
Living in a longhouse is an unforgettable experience , that i would recommend to everyone .
" Such a point is a Monad .
But geometrically dimension and time are not related apart from the fact that time is a measure of one direction just as a meter is a measure of a single breadth of a three dimensional expanse .
Such a number is a transcendental number , a number that is not the root of a polynomial equation with rational coefficients .
He challenges his adversary that regards the first Binary earthly cube to be the same as the Quaternary earthly cube , contends that a cube is a cube and any duplication only changes the scale of one and the same object .
Teaming with a mentor is a career strategy that can bring huge benefits , especially to women in unbalanced work environments like engineering .
" An Irishman 's a white man .
A concussion was a sure bet , but he really needed to see his pupils .
" A book is the only immortality .
" Yet , a good illustration is from another passage that has been provided in the Theistic Psychology Textbook which is " A marriage of good and truth in a person is the church in him .
Theistic psychology has been able to look at the spiritual perspective of this phrase as in " A conjunction of good and truth in a person is the regenerating mind in him .
Temples protected by a monster-gorilla is an idea derivative of H. Rider Haggard who used gorilla-protected lost race treasures multiple times .
But to me a gateway is a system that transports information on behalf of a range of other systems .
In other words , in this case a gateway is a computer that has a direct connection to the internet ( well through adsl ) .
And a real encounter with a wild animal such as a bear is an apt allegory for this dangerous process .
Symbolically , a crystal is the lens of the Visionary eye : a prism which , when used in the right way , can focus the inner light and guide the Cabbalistic journeyer in the quest for at-one-ment with the Source .
But what kind of an object is an " obligation " that persists after the demise of its physical creation ?
We had to do this in a HAVING clause because the number of rows in a group is a concept that does n't make sense at the per-row level on which WHERE clauses operate .
The relation between two oblique coordinate systems that differ by a translation is the same as for cartesian systems : see ( 1.1.4 ) .
In the strictest sense , a settlement is an agreement between a debtor and a creditor to pay off any remaining money owed , at a reduced amount .
This means the negotiator must be equipped with enough facts to persuade a creditor , or lending institution , that a settlement is the only viable payment option .
Just as the Resurrection of Christ is the manifestation of Life beyond the threshold of death , so too the birth of an infant is a manifestation of life , which is always destined , through Christ , for that " fullness of life " which is in God Himself : " I came that they may have life , and have it abundantly " ( Jn 10:10 10:10 ) .
A wife is a burden imposed by law .
A supernova is a cataclysmic event that occurs as a result of the final uncontrolled nuclear reactions in a very high mass star at the end of its life .
Worth a visit is the Tirolese Provincial Museum ( Tiroler Landesmuseum Ferdinandeum ) in Innsbruck 's Museumstrasse , off the Burggraben .
A request is the term we use to encompass all three modules and the workflow component .
Besides , a body is a body , " shrugged Max .
" I thought you said a body was a body , " huffed Tarper .
But the interpretation of a statute is a far from academic exercise .
Classically , a set of finite sequences of tokens drawn from an alphabet is a language , and may be characterised by a grammar .
The first is that the notion of a program being an implementation of a specification has never been made precise .
Being an animal is no fun !
A lobectomy is a type of lung cancer surgery in which one lobe of a lung is removed .
A lobectomy is a major surgical procedure , and complications are not uncommon .
In the Golden Dawn tradition being shown a diagram is an initiation to the powers that are behind it .
Experience has shown us that living with a family is the most interesting and effective way to become fully immersed in your host country 's language and culture .
Consisting of neither volume , area , length , nor any other higher dimensional analogue , a point is a 0 - dimensional object , symbolized by a small dot .
An arc is a portion of the circumference of a circle .
For instance , a rainbow is a colored arc .
The 3 - D representation of a triangle is a tetrahedron , but if the surface of the solid is curved , a cone is produced .
Conversely , a helix is a three-dimensional coil that runs along the surface of a cylinder , like the threads on a pipe or a telephone cord .
Sometimes throwing a grenade into a room is a better method .
In this sense , the owner of a room is he who inhabits it at the time in question ; the owners of the Matterhorn , as far as it is part of a natural park , are those who set foot on it to enjoy the landscape ; the owners of a picture are those who enjoy looking at it .
A benefice being a public function , conferring a recompense for the discharge of the duties appertaining to it , should be given in the name of the state , and it should be known to whom the state gives it ; an action at law for a benefice is therefore ridiculous .
The sense of an expression is the thought it expresses , while its reference is the object it represents .
Carrying a firearm on a bus is a serious crime .
Perhaps , clinging to the last hut as it was towed away behind a tractor was the Noth Mail 's enthusiatic Special Representative .
" This clearly encompasses a 3 DPDF and any doubt should be dispelled by Mackie v Behringer 93 where Pumfrey J held that a document ( a circuit diagram ) embodying the topology rather than actual geometric shape of a design was a design document .
The principle of the Salomon case , that a company is a legal entity distinct from its members , is strictly applied by the courts whenever it is sought to attribute the rights or liabilities of a company to its shareholders , or regard the property of a company as belonging in law or equity to the shareholders .
Where such a body is a charitable trust ( for example a building preservation trust ) there will be access to sources of funding not available to local authorities ; for example charitable trusts and individual donations .
A muxy is a dunghill , and the pucksy a quagmire .
The usually well supported A class was a bit thin on the ground with Lionel Lawley still struggling to find the speed that his beautifully engineered motor once had .
However , in all cases , the grantee of a discharge is the adult .
A swarm is the total number of people simultaneously downloading the same .
CDPA , art 50 A ( 2 ) : " For the purposes of this section and sections 50 B , 50 BA and 50 C a person is a lawful user of a computer program if ( whether under a licence to do any acts restricted by the copyright in the program or otherwise ) , he has a right to use the program .
In English Law , a charge is a security interest created without any transfer of title or possession to the beneficiary .
A depositor 's right to claim repayment of his deposit from a bank is a chose in action recognised as property and that a charge over such a chose in action could be validly granted not only to a third party but also to the bank itself under such arrangement .
An alternative is a local history project , in which grandparents are interviewed in the L 1 , and a report is made in L 2 .
" Massumi searches for a way to address the quality of experience : " An emotion is a subjective content , the sociolinguistic fixing of the quality of an experience which is from that point onward defined as personal .
' The financial system as a whole is a fallacy !
If a book is a movie in your pocket , this one 's a special edition DVD .
He is reputed to be one of the first to sing gospelypso when in 1971 at the OYB he was sang A man is a man when he thinking clean .
He is reputed to be one of the first to sing ' gospelypso ' when in 1971 at the OYB he was sang A man is a man when he thinking clean .
Segalstad is a geologist by training ( geologists as a group are the most aware of the climate science scam ) and a professor at Oslo University .
Once again it should not be forgotten that an inquest is a fact finding exercise and not a method of apportioning guilt .
" The coroner 's task in a case such as this is a formidable one once again , it should not be forgotten that an inquest is a fact-finding exercise and not a method of apportioning guilt .
Biologically , a gene is a distinct part of the chromosome .
So everything can be regarded as a form of Ishvara , in the way that a wave is a form of the water constituting the ocean .
A vampire is the manifestation of an unclean spirit possessing a decomposing body .
Spreading the word , visiting ( we are open daily from 10 am to 4 pm ) , adopting one of the rescued donkeys or simply sending a donation are some of the ways of helping .
The traditional deposit paid by a buyer when he enters into a contract is an earnest for the performance of the contract , and can be retained by the seller if the buyer defaults .
An inquest is a fact finding inquiry conducted by a coroner , with or without a jury , to establish reliable answers to four important but limited factual questions .
A herb is a drug and is used for specific illnesses .
The useful attribute of a state is the instantaneous probability of the system being in that state .
I am so used to the concept of a hazard being a state ( as opposed to a hazardous event ) that it took a minute to find it as the second assertion .
The cause is that the criminals in foreign countries can find out whether a person is a foreigners by his / her appearance and behavior .
It would not be easy to build a reliable product which met the project specifications in time , and thus my most important criterion for choosing a platform was the productivity afforded to me by that platform .
A circuit is a list of gates .
There was also a time that buying a house was a lot easier , and considerably more affordable .
A citizen is an entitled person if ( a ) he was a shareholder of that legal entity immediately before the invasion and until its dissolution after the invasion or ( b ) he became a shareholder after the invasion in the same way referred to in paragraph ( 2 ) above .
A citizen is an entitled person if ( a ) he was a shareholder immediately before the invasion and continues to be one or ( b ) he became a shareholder after the invasion in the same way referred to in paragraph ( 2 ) above , and ( c ) the legal entity is entitled to and decides to mortgage the occupied or inaccessible immovable property for the benefit of its citizen shareholder .
In a speech on the question of communist affiliation to the British Labour Party , Lenin informed the delegates that whether a party was a workers ' party or not , did not depend upon the number of workers in membership , but upon the men who led it and the content of its political tactics .
theory , they are in many ways unusual , an example being the extreme longevity and persistence of the patterns !
Choosing a counsellor is an important decision .
And in the end watching Woody Harrelson letting rip with submachine guns on a rollercoaster is some kind of dramatic ending .
But I find serious issues are reduced to dangerous simplification such as an X is automatically a Y. Therefore a golly is a toy ; a Muslim is a terrorist and suicide bomber ; a Nazi uniform is a fancy dress and race equals faith .
in africa having a degree is one thing & getting a job is another thing , you must have a jobfather or be ready to part with some good amount of money or the combination of the two to get a job , people nolonger look at the qualities of the papers but who you are & what you have , whose son or whose daughter ?
Many professional women have now preferred being skillful other than what their degrees entail for Example a Biochemist of a Pharmacologist being a Marketing Manager , hence leaving out the truly endured and trained people in that field to have an equal opportunity of job places , just because of cheap , careless and " STUPID " sex .
Speaking to the House of Commons , Andrew Lansley said that although a cap was the " right basis " for reform , the government needed to explore cheaper options for changing the system .
Maybe even being in a family is a bit like being in a game : a difficult game ...
An example is the development of a computer model showing how marine predators such as sharks forage the ocean for food .
In a way I can say that Parghat Singh Kahlon or Gattu , as a character is an amalgamation of me as a person and my struggles in life .
If an item is half price and the seller wants you to pay using a non Amazon system then if you have an ounce of common sense the alarm bells should ring .
I think that £ 40 for a game is a lot if you cannot guarantee it will work .
The Shepherd Line was constructed in very similar ground conditions but what makes it more of a challenge is the high water table and the granular material further north .
The Tablet 28 August 2012 28 August 2012 - web link Pakistani girl accused of Qur ' an burning is a minor , say medics Girl , who is said to be 14 but may have a younger mental age , will be tried in a juvenile court for blasphemy charge .
jobholder A jobholder is a worker working in Great Britain under a contract , aged at least 16 and under 75 with qualifying earnings .
If the noise nuisance you have been experiencing is not currently ongoing an email is the best way of making us aware of the problem(s) that you have encountered .
A spark was all that was needed to ignite the strike , and that spark , was Cortonwood Colliery .
" " Yes , miss Manners , an equipage is a carriage .
But Atkinson said a whale was a gentle creature , and it was a sort of sea-elephant , and that the most powerful creatures in nature are always the least hurtful .
He responds that not all poets are ineffectual , that a poet is a sage , a humanist , and physician to all men , although he doubts that he himself actually fills this role .
Observing the Limit Lines as you approach and go round a bend is a technique you are taught as part of advanced motorcycling .
A sentence is a group of words expressing a complete thought .
Read in this new way these ideas lose nothing of their power - a discourse is a power construct , of course - but neither do they achieve a measure of invulnerability .
The tense of a verb is the form it takes to indicate whether the action takes place in the past , the present or the future .
If a week is a long time in politics , 12 months is surely an eternity .
The commonest idea of a dictionary is a book that lists words alphabetically and gives their meanings .
NVidia should n't have to ( or anyone for that matter , but I forget that not everyone on a PC is a power user at minimum ) .
Showing it running on grass is cool , but basically a lawn is a flat ( although soft ) surface .
The rule says that an individual is a bachelor if it is male and it is not married .
That your sanity was in question as a result is a clear measure of our culture 's deranged and degenerating values .
We have created clock time so that it proceeds absolutely uniformly - a second is a second , an hour is an hour , day after day after day .
It brings to mind what Oscar Wilde said in praise of one of his favourite vices , the cigarette : " A cigarette is the perfect type of a perfect pleasure .
The Warners imply that failure to discuss whether or not to use an antibiotic is a sign of pediatric incompetence .
Be it through the SERPS or by the links themselves actual visitors to a website is the real goal .
Before then , they had felt that occasionally cleaning a bathroom was a big contribution .
A cuboid is a box-shaped object .
Poison Sumac is organic , but that definitely does n't make it goodPoison Sumac are terrible to put on your face ... a chemical is a chemical , what matters is your skin type .
Alternatively , a precursor is a profane toddler .
A nerd is a human being without enough Africa in him ...
Coupland 's 1996 Microserfs offers several comparisons ; perhaps the most illuminating is that " a geek is a nerd who knows that he is one .
I think that people who are not experienced in dealing with attorneys think that a lawyer is a lawyer .
The justificatory status of a belief is a function of the reliability of the processes that cause it , where ( as a first approximation ) reliability consists in the tendency of a process to produce beliefs that are true rather than false .
That a monad is a " mirror " of the whole universe entails that one 's soul will actually have an infinite number and complexity of perceptions .
Change in a monad is the intelligible , constantly , and continuously ( recalling here the principle of continuity discussed above ) unfolding being of a thing , from itself , to itself .
A girl is the first to crawl over to the instructor , defeated .
For about a month I 've had no real reason not to , beyond feeling too busy , but saving a few hours by not going to 1 or 2 classes a week is the ultimate false economy .
Thus a word is a string of binary digits - abbreviated to bits .
As has been said , a register is the general name given to any storage location ( apart from the main store itself ) .
A compiler is a kind of translator which accepts a user 's program written in a problem-orientated high-level language and translates it into the corresponding set of basic machine instructions , ready for execution .
One that set a standard was the 1978 VAX , of which we have several in the collection .
A terrarium is a self-contained miniature environment that creates a thriving world , alive with several natural elements .
A sheriff is a leader who should bring together the best minds to solve problems .
" Such a statistic is an alarming one .
Cookies - A cookie is a small piece of data sent from a website and stored in a user 's web browser while a user is browsing a website .
* Elements of a crime are the required ingredients for an action to be that crime .
In the olden days witnessing an execution was a sight not to be missed by old or young folk ; even children wended their way to the fatal tree .
Serjit Maniktala , a turban was a valuable reward , as it was a royal item of dress .
Having to find other stupid hobbies to indulge in for a while is no big deal .
An important contribution to the cultural history of the Pacific Northwest , Getting a Grip is an important contribution to Judo history as well .
Such a car is the lotus Elan Sprint .
A referendum is a proposal to the council to repeal the law .
For years I wore a button that read " A lesbian is the rage of all women condensed to the point of explosion " , I DO know better .
A year is a long time in the career of a young scientist .
A region is a set of people .
Repurposing the " old " space became the next step for owner Jennifer Wilson , who considered a florist and a produce market among the possibilities , " but a restaurant was the best fit " she says .
For some Disability Studies students starting university and learning to be a student is a frightening and overwhelming process .
The sense of powerlessness I felt at home as a child was both alleviated and exacerbated when I went at age 10 to live at Bloorview , an institution for children and youth with disabilities .
Possibly the most important aspect of working within a budget is that customer ( site owner ) expectations need to be managed .
My self-imposed task with a keyboard was a little easier than having to throw one of at least four possible types , for every letter to be used , on a rolling press , so I just figured I was helping the guy out .
A genius is a guy like Norman Einstein .
Students know the buoyant force on an object in a fluid is an upward force equal to the weight of the fluid the object has displaced .
No one knows if a group is a " Domestic Terrorist " group until such time as they actually do something .
I 'd love to tell you that launching a book is a breeze .
" Such a man was the true noble , since " nobility is synonymous with a life of effort , ever set on excelling oneself , in passing beyond what one is to what one sets up as a duty and an obligation .
Some brilliant people still receive Phd 's , but there is no longer any reason to suppose someone with a Phd is an educated person , as once we could .
I disagree that Obama being a Muslim is a legitimate concern .
Choose The Outfit In Telephone Music Video One of the ideas for lady gaga costumes that you should certainly consider if you want to dress like her for an event is the outfit she wears in the Telephone music video .
A code is a mapping of source messages ( words from the source alphabet alpha ) into codewords ( words of the code alphabet beta ) .
The primary caregiver for 78 percent of children cared for by a relative was a grandparent or grandparents .
Fantasizing about a divorce is a sign that you actually need one .
A thorough understanding of the business processes of an organization is a necessary prerequisite for developing effective IT support for those processes .
Using the term " HD " to describe a telescope is a little silly .
" I answered , " because an education is a powerful thing .
Let this be a lesson-that an education is a basic human right , a right that Pakistan 's daughters will not be denied .
Further , the Committee expresses its concern that children aged 16 or above can , and have been , sentenced to the death penalty and , while acknowledging the presidential pardon recently accorded to children sentenced to death , the Committee notes that such a sentence is a violation of Convention article 37 ( a ) .
A scenester is a person a person who tries very hard to fit the stereotype of a social , artistic , or musical scene or subculture , more or less a poser , whereas the scene people are their own unique subculture , which emphasizes creativity and uniqueness .
The laws regarding annulments are somewhat different from state to state , but the purpose of an annulment is the same everywhere : to ...
An annulment is a legal term in which a proceeding makes a marriage null and void .
An annulment is an alternative to divorce that will also terminate a marriage .
So a protest is the next best way of saying ' this is sickening .
Going out and having a burger is a national pastime .
One was - it kind of relates well to this book - I will mash up - I will mess up the headline , but it was essentially the idea of Obama as an elite is a great boon for African-Americans .
So in this sense taking a course is a commercial transaction between student and school .
The Coat of Arms A nickname is a short , clever , cute , derogatory , or otherwise substitute name for a person or things real name ( for example , Nick is short for Nicholas ) . ...
A tradition is a story or a custom that is memorized and passed down from generation to generation , originally without the need for a writing system . ...
" And , Xenophon added , " When he saw that a man was a capable administrator , acting on just principles , improving the land under his control and making it bring in profit , he never took his post away from him , but always gave him additional responsibility .
A plus is the garage rate of $ 14 for. ..
A child is a child if you ca n't handle there needs :rant: do n't bloody well have them ffs Rich ?
A malodorant is a super stinkbomb with a truly intolerable smell .
The highlight had to be when the commentator mentioned that the idea of a rapture was a relatively new addition into christianity .
a kukri is a kick-ass knife used by gurkhas !
A tree is a lovely idea !
not surprised theyare asking for more in these cicumstances the intrest is not applied the £ 3 a month is a token payment in case the circumstances of the debtor changes ie they win the lottery etc then the company can ask for more the token payment is so the debt does not lapse .
You may want to get someone to check the coil spring hasnt snapped either - not uncommon on Novas BTW , changing a driveshaft is a pig ..
Why not just accept that the parents did n't do their jobs properly and the owner is a fool you ca n't stop a child being a child .
by the same token , you cannot stop a dog being a dog , in certain situations .
A helicopter is an aircraft , it is a rotary wing aircraft , by definition .
A win is a win at the end of the day .
Almost as bad as a pedestrian are the folks that open their car doors onto the pavement without looking and smash your kneecaps in .
If they ( the headlights that Tony was talking about ) are dazzling drivers , then there is a problem with them ( the headlights ) and you ( Tony ) should get your vehicle ( a car is a type of vehicle ) fixed .
( a car is a type of vehicle ) Is that meant to be funny , because I find that remark offensive .
Oh gawd , MOVE ON , an ex is an ex for a reason .
Doc , a camera is a camera regardless of what design it is .
One of the names which has been mentioned as standing a chance is the Bishop of Reading , Stephen Cottrell who was educated at Belfairs High School in Leigh-on-Sea .
The first minutes during an incident are the most important to stabilise injured people , administering essential life saving care and providing the support and attention essential before the arrival of the emergency service or paramedics .
( 5 ) For the purposes of sub-paragraph ( 4 ) an offence is an " applicable offence " if it is -
Does anyone know if a having a discectomy is a complete bar to joing the Royal Marines as an officer ?
Standard sized reels loaded with fine Nylon ( or more importantly something like whiplash pro ) and a shockleader is the ideal for long distance fishing / spodding or marker setup ( 40 mm but ring on rod ) .
Then again - booking a minicab to take you from your car to a petrol station and back again with a can is a bit pointless .
You can not have everybody present , so if TG 9 people want to be reprosented than air your views to your Officers , that is what they are there for. One of the big problems , and in fact the reason we went a few years without a symposiom is the lack of accomodation available at camps .
A fable is a very short story that tells us how to behave or that teaches us a les ...
Hydrofoil A hydrofoil is a wing-like structure designed to lift the hull of a moving vessel out of the water , so that it can travel faster .
Hydrofoil A hydrofoil is a foil which operates in water .
Do n't worry too much about how working there would be before you even send in your resume , and do n't worry about your whole life when sending in a resume is the first step .
Still the self-referring character of a system is an implicit embarrassment , often dealt with by simply ignoring the problem .
Students must carefully select each word they include in a work ; therefore , understanding the sound connotation of a word is an important conversation .
If A is a test space with outcome-space X , a state on A is a mapping ω : X → [ 0,1 ] such that Σx∈E ω(x) = 1 for every test E ∈ A. Thus , a state is a consistent assignment of a probability weight to each test-consistent in that , where two distinct tests share a common outcome , the state assigns that outcome the same probability whether it is secured as a result of one test or the other .
Various arguments can be adduced suggesting that the only reasonable candidate for such a mapping is the Sasaki projection φp : L → L , defined by φp(q) = ( q ∨ p ' ) ∧ p .
An Optimist is an eight-foot , single-handed sailing dinghy intended for use by sailors ages 15 and under .
Owning a pet is a happy experience , but it 's a lot of responsibility too .
Moreover , an idiom is an expression , word , or phrase whose sense means something different from what the words literally imply .
( USA ) The person who wears the pants in a relationship is the dominant person who controls things .
( UK ) The person who wears the trousers in a relationship is the dominant person who controls things .
Colloquialism A colloquialism is an expression not used in formal speech or writing .
The easiest area to feel and touch to determine the body condition of an animal are the rib areas , on either side of the spine , by running a hand over those areas and pressing down with a few fingers .
The Commission is aware that the change in direction needed to solve the structural problems of more than a century is no easy task .
A positive feedback loop strengthens the response : AgRP and NPY inhibit the activity of proopiomelanocortin ( POMC ) neurons whose function is to inhibit " X " neurons ( a double-negative is a positive ) .
At common law a lease is a contract between landlord and tenant which , if the landlord himself has or acquires an estate in the land , vests a leasehold estate in the tenant .
To Catch a Thief is a great little Hitchcock romp , stylish , sassy and with a real eventual princess to boot .
The philosopher Horace has said : " A picture is a poem without words , " a concept that in a sense views these two art forms as belonging to the same " family " treating painting and poetry as " sisters .
Hearing Golden speak directly to an audience is a powerful way for students to gain inspiration for this activity .
Printing and stretching a canvas is the ideal gift for an artistic decoration in your home .
" That being said , one might make an argument for including Track 3 , " Kilo " featuring Raekwon with its hook , " All around the world today / The kilo is the measure / A kilo is a thousand grams / It 's easy to remember , " if he or she were teaching across disciplines .
A register is a state of proper alignment or a variety of language used in a specific social setting .
However , when I come to understand that a circle is a locus of points equidistant from a given point , I will realize by means of a clear and distinct concept what it was that I originally conceived in a vague and confused manner in my original concept of circle .
In fact , for Abelard , a status is an object of the divine mind , whereby God preconceives the state of his creation from eternity .
The metaphysical debate over the real distinction of essence and existence from this point of view is nothing but the issue whether the individualized common nature signified by the definition of a thing is the same as the act of being signified by the verb ' is ' in the same thing .
Where We Have Been Culture 60 days ago we had an environment were a few members were using the forums as a tool to bully people .
A riot was the result .
I realize that buying a home is a major decision in a person ?
Also selling a home is a big responsibility .
They too will learn that creating a biography is no easy task ; writing in relationship with time past and present is an integral part of creating these works .
We want students to accurately refer to writers using appropriate literary terminology : thus , emphasize that the author of a biography is a biographer .
For example , if the subject of a biography was a Chinese immigrant-a railroad builder who lived in San Francisco during 1863 , the time frame should be considered , for during that period , many Chinese workers were forced to live in segregated communities .
At mile intervals from the a town is a dot within the dashes labelled with the distance from the town .
So not being able to choose what direction to hit the ball in and how hard you hit it , and only being able to play a pass in the general direction of a player is a good thing ?
An ideology is a system of thought that appears obvious and logically correct to the person thinking it but is in reality only a falsification of what we consider to be natural societal laws .
Ooh ... a decade is a long time kid !!
' An idea is a feat of association .
Growing up on the edge of the Solent , one of my favourite trips as a child was the Lymington-Yarmouth ferry .
Putting together both hexagrams in a phrase is a succint but very intelligent way of getting the full pic with few words , I 'll do this more often from now on , thanks .
As Garth Illingworth points out : " To look back across 13 billion years of time to when the Universe was just a baby is a remarkable accomplishment for humankind .
An interval is the distance between 2 notes by the way so playing a note on the first fret and then playing a note anywhere else will create an ' interval ' between those 2 notes .
However , frankly , I feel that most attempts to teach hangeul to a foreigner are a bit too complicated .
OK mine is a W 124 but a barrel is a barrel , you need to be able to turn the key to position 1 to remove it .
A hit is a request for a file .
The eleven hour flight to Nairobi with Christian inside a crate was a worrying time , as it was unclear if he would survive , but care and consideration was given as Ace and John made numerous telephone calls to ascertain the safest method of transportation .
In computing slang , a hacker is a person who enjoys exploring the details of programmable systems and how to stretch their capabilities , as opposed to most users , who prefer to learn only the minimum necessary .
Hacker [ hobbyist ] In home and hobby circles , a hacker is a person who heavily modifies the software or hardware of their own computer system .
Such a plan is a lot like savings with compound interest .
A faucet is the thing attatched to a sink that dispenses water .
A hacksaw is a cutting tool often used to cut pipe .
A coupling is a piece of metal used to connect two pipes with female connectors at the ends .
A purse is a handbag in America , not Wigan .
Taking part in an open forum when you are answerable to a product(s) is a dangerous game hence why most manufacturers avoid them .
Three persons sharing a rent are a sort of partnership no one can go out without affecting the others .
The identifier of an attribute is the position of the attribute in the create_relation operation 's | typed_vector_array .
The | identifier of an attribute is the position of the attribute in | the create_relation operation 's | typed_vector_array .
Photographing food on location at a restaurant is a very common assignment for a food photographer .
A baby is a baby and ought not be terminated just because a woman decides that it might constrict her lifestyle .
Seeing only results if an eye is the point of interaction , ie the line of travel of light and eye coalesce .
While electrodynamics holds that the speed of light in a vacuum is a universal constant ( c ) , the speed at which light propagates in a material may be significantly less than c .
The mere fact that an initial report is obtained for the Secretary of State , for example , and not for a tribunal is no reason not to have well in mind the protection afforded by the Directions .
Habiyambere said , " A bicycle is the vehicle of hope for an entire nation rebuilding itself from tragedies , because it makes us feel the togetherness as a team .
1 4 HOW CAN A COMMAND DETERMINE IF AN OBJECT IS A dm_file ? . . . .
This implies ( a ) that these commands be changed , ( b ) that they be able to determine if an object is a dm_file and ( c ) that there exist ring 2 gates to perform operations the command could not do from the user ring .
It might be convenient to effectively allow it ; that is why the ring brackets for dm_file directories will be [ 2 , user , user ] instead of [ 2 , 2 , 2 ] 4 HOW CAN A COMMAND DETERMINE IF AN OBJECT IS A DM_FILE ?
A caterpillar is the larval form of a lepidopteran ( a member of the insect order comprising butterflies and moths ) .
A plague is an invisible punishment .
It may be pertinent to ask if such an expedition is any less fanciful than predicting the future through the positions of various cosmic bodies .
The amount of connect time that Answering Service will charge for a session is the time since the most recent of : the first call to $ charge_channel_use for that session .
Eager to ensure a victory was the outcome , Arsenal induced a heavy attacking threat and added a second through the in-form Lukas Podolski .
A hackathon is an intensive idea-generation and prototyping process , and it is unreasonable to expect finished and ' market ready ' products and apps to come directly from it .
You know the only part you can consider this as a conversion is the first three episodes and those have a little twist of my own to add a bit more realism .
A kotatsu is a Japanese traditional heating device which is essentially a square or rectangular coffee table with a heater installed underneath , covered with a futon-like blanket .
A fundamentalist is a person who has abdicated their ability to think for themselves , and will not hesitate to commit any act seen as furthering their cause .
" Anyone who 's not a philosopher is an asshole .
The presence of them in a product is a strong indication that a product contains hidden MSG .
But it is not only for the happiness and wellbeing of themselves that persons contemplating marriage must consult ; they should also remember that the rearing of a family is the main object of that holy state , and that their own happiness must be intimately connected with that of their children .
The access class of a meeting is the authorization of the chairman at the time the meeting was created .
The last appetizers to make an appearance were the Blue Cheese Beef Croustades .
So the only alternative to buying buses that are up to scratch emissions-wise would be to buy secondhand buses - but hey , a headline is a headline .
£ 2 a month is the fee charged by the bank .
Factory play was good , getting teamkilled by a grenade because Jason throws like a bird was a laugh .
I suppose removing a tint is a bit easier than putting on .
Perhaps an explanation is some of the most popular vampire franchises around now have central characters that do n't eat humans and want to be the good guys - a far cry from their bloody ancestors .
What will come as a relief is a recent awkward event or incident had nothing to do with you .
A borehole is an environmentally friendly means of accessing naturally filtered water .
Although I 'm not sure calling a sexist person a cunt is the right way to go about things .
Operating as part of a team is the way to go .
What really disqualifies a tool is the manner in which it must be used ; if the operator must undergo special training , the tool is unconvivial ; if he is compelled to buy special tools to repair it with , it is likewise unconvivial ; if it imposes an ideal of speed or productivity on its owner , a slave operator or someone else who would prefer to live without it , it fails accordingly .
' A closely-related issue is the post-modern 's hatred of those who announce incontrovertible facts which apply universally : given their understanding of ' truth ' , such an announcement is the height of arrogance .
The core of a centrifuge is an ingeniously designed rapidly rotating tube , or " rotor , " in which uranium gas spins .
A calculator is a handy thing to have when you are using the special VID setting :D Another thing to remember is that it will only work above 1 v. CPU-Z and a few others all report the voltage as higher than it should be , but it turns out correct when measured with a DMM .
new packs are available on amazon and ebay at a lower price than winning moves an example is the latest dc heroes deck is £ 3.50 on ebay .
What kind of a life is this ?
She is the skeptical questioner , and the person making a substantive claim , i.e. that a dark patch on a photograph is a dramatic zoological discovery , must be the one to give her proof .
" An upright is the component that links the suspension wishbones to the axle and the wheel .
A spreadsheet is a good tool here because it has separate tabbed sheets that can be used to group words under different categories .
We begin with producer Matt Damon warning us that being a director is no laughing matter : " The hardest you 've ever worked ?
" But , certainly , writing a book is a very messy business for me , and I have kind of a dog 's breakfast around me for a long time - all the time , actually .
The evening that Ida Ekblad painted a storefront window and Nils Bech sang a cappella on a ladder was a must-attend , as was the launch of Provence , a new magazine about art hobbies produced by a group of young dandies from Frankfurt 's Städelschule .
But tonight , the nonprofit Schinkel Pavilion is hosting a performance and exhibition by Cyprien Gaillard , the French artist for whom a demolition is the call of the wild .
An exception is the large painting by Corinne Wasmuht at Johann König , who is hosting nightly dance parties at the Brutalist church where he lives .
Isolating a gene is a discovery , rather than an invention .
The only thing novel about discovering a gene is the process used to isolate it , and there really ought to be several paths to discovering a gene since we are talking about chemical processes .
Being a pilot was a lifelong dream of his , and he 'd done all the right things to get there .
A musket is a more expensive machine than a javelin or a bow and arrows ; a cannon or a mortar than a balista or a catapulta .
" The idea that we declared a pandemic when there was n't a pandemic is both historically inaccurate and downright irresponsible , " said WHO spokesman Gregory Hartl in a telephone interview .
The man in the bed with a child is a self portrait detail in the waste like middle ground which also shows scattered fragments ( such as the broken Matisse bust ) being sucked up as if in a sea .
0 bama or Rand , a cult is a cult .
[ 49 ] However a firearm certificate for a personal protection weapon will only be authorised where the Police Service of Northern Ireland deems there is a ' verifiable specific risk ' to the life of an individual and that the possession of a firearm is a reasonable , proportionate and necessary measure to protect their life .
No more so than the security checks needed to get a clearance are a violation of the fourth amendment .
" But Freddie is not a toddler-he is a severely autistic 20 - year-old .
Putting thoughts down in a sketchbook is a part of practice .
A hydra is a finite tree , with a root at the bottom .
This means that many of the activities on our phones , app or not , are additive to what we previously used a computer for. This makes sense : what makes mobile such a big deal is that instead of a computer being a destination device , it 's now a companion that goes with us everywhere .
So , if a budget is an issue , I highly recommend getting the book by itself .
Another sure way to entice a reporter is a press release that starts out by saying , " Contrary to previous scientific belief ...
I love rice pilaf , and wamping it up to make it a meal is a fine idea .
The zenith distance of an object is the complement of its altitude .
As the squillion posts over the years about infidelity attest , a ring is no guarantee of a commitment taken seriously .
The path of an object is the fusion of all of its q-locations .
The mere fact that coexistence at a location is a relation that an en - / exduring object is the ' proper subject ' of ( in Haslanger 's useful phrase ) , as opposed to standing in that relation ' vicariously ' in virtue of parts standing in it , goes no distance towards showing that the relation is basic or has any interesting ontological consequences .
The existence of such a duty is a question of law , Wallace v. Wilson , 411 Mass 8 , 12 ( 1991 ) ; Davis v. Westwood Group , supra at 743 , and is " to be determined by reference to existing social values and customs and appropriate social policy .
The chance that a match is a false positive is of course mainly depending on the frequency of the name .
A book is a product .
A producer is a craftsman -- a person who takes all the day 's news reports and assembles them into a newscast .
Nothing can be worse when trying to show a presentation is the fact that you are seen more than the slideshow .
The rule is a model which describes relationships , the application of the rule to generate an outcome is a simulation .
( Nilsson 1982 ) In this case a person is the outcome rather than a simple yes or no. Sideways chaining works a bit on both principles , finding both weighted factors and weighted solutions .
Although those standards have never been clearly stated nor are open for others to inspect , the fact remains that banning a comment is the risk people have to take when submitting their work to the Apple App Store - um , I mean , to this blog .
Resistance in a circuit is a physical constant .
According to Webster 's , a mentor is an influential senior sponsor or supporter but to me , you 're more than a lousy , one sentence definition .
A troll is a troll is not a troll for everyone .
An oscilloscope is a door to a wide world of investigation .
Nails on a chalkboard is the ultimate example .
Not even , say , consensual adult spanking or why a duck is a duck ?
A songline is a person 's soul , for lack of a better term .
The Fog of War The passing of a year is a time for soul-searching , as are the twilight years of a man 's life .
A myth is a story that describes how a people came to be , and why things are as they are .
The need , or opportunity for such a strategy is the fact that preferences can only be transferred to a candidate who remains in the race .
The membership and nomination meetings in a constituency are the places where an individual 's voice can be heard and his or her vote counts the most .
When a child is the appropriate age they may be entered into a lottery for the schools that are closest to them .
The best writers are unanimous on two essential points , the two point test : a landmark must have existed from the " time whereof the memory of man runneth not to the contrary " and a landmark is an element in the form or essence of the Society of such importance that Freemasonry would no longer be freemasonry if it were removed .
Any climber knows that the most challenging ascent on a mountain is the frozen wall facing due north .
A mantra is a sound body or shabdaartha of a devata .
Liar and a Thief is an anti-Bush pop song by Christopher Hetherington .
The artist notes that the earliest image of a harlequin is a man covered in leaves .
A crown is a restoration that covers , or caps , a tooth to restore it to its normal shape and size .
For those who are the wrongdoers , I could not agree more with the implication of a prior post that an apology is all most people want or need .
" So all these companies that never thought that they had to actually worry about price , that they could be so much more expensive than their nearest competitors , suddenly thought , the brand is dead ; we are now in a commodity marketplace , which from the perspective of a marketer is a very , very bad place to be .
For it 's in the Greek city that , for example , a magistracy is an object of pretension , for which someone can pose a candidacy for a particular function .
Mr James said he thought the views of those living on a street were the main consideration when making deciding if parking restrictions should be introduced .
The two longest sections of this cornucopia of a book are a hybrid novella and television script and the substantial beginnning of what would have been a major novel .
Buying a home is a relatively stable , long-term investment .
Did you know that for gases the temperature of a gas is a measure of the average kinetic energy of the molecules of that gas ?
While in the short term previous exposure to worthless financial instruments and now to potentially bad sovereign debt makes people concerned at the end of the day owning a bank is a license to print money .
Strategy 4 : Reduce the Availability of Firearms Perhaps the most ambitious effort to reduce the number of firearms in a community was the 1977 District of Columbia Firearms Control Act , which prohibited handgun ownership by virtually everyone except police officers , security guards , and previous gun owners .
We return late morning and after a well-deserved brunch a siesta is a welcome treat till mid afternoon .
A catalyst is a substance that starts or speeds a chemical reaction .
( Note : in the investment world a kilobar is a bar of gold , silver , or platinum weighing 1 kilogram . ) kilobase ( kb ) a unit of genetic information equal to the information carried by 1000 pairs of the base units in the double-helix of DNA ; also used as a unit of relative distance equal to the length of a strand of DNA containing 1000 base pairs .
One kilogram mole of a compound is the number of kilograms of the compound equal to the molecular weight of a molecule of that compound measured in atomic mass units .
One kilomole of a compound is the number of kilograms of the compound equal to the molecular weight of a molecule of that compound in atomic mass units .
Of course , a kiloyear is the same as a millennium .
" In particular , a kvadratmeter is a square meter .
Indeed , after the manner of Plato or Frege or Realist Aristotelianism the objective referent of a concept is a special constellation of abstract qualities .
Life as a fish is a bit less frustrating since he is able to communicate by " alternating the rhythm of the strokes of his dorsal fin " ( p 81 ) .
Making love for the express purpose of making a baby is another matter altogether .
( Unless , of course , making a baby is the last thing on their minds . ) If you suspect that you may be less than ideally fertile , try switching from tightey-whiteys and skin-tight jeans to boxer shorts and rapper-style clown pants .
An adult is a human being or living organism that is of relatively mature age , typically associated with sexual maturity and the attainment of reproductive age .
As a car is the second biggest purchase most of us are going to make , we realise that you are going to want to look after it and we pride ourselves in the services we provide .
If an applicant is a citizen of the Irish Republic or a Commonwealth citizen other residential and ancestry conditions must be satisfied .
A hotel is a pleasant hotel , clean rooms , well designed , nice ambience , friendly staff .
Because constantly spinning a rotor is a far more efficient use of energy than the wasteful , reciprocating motion of a piston accelerating from 0 mph at the end of its travel up to around 40 mph and then decelerating to 0 mph at the other end of the cylinder , all in the space of a hundredth of a second .
With Grimsby ahead against Northampton , a draw was no use to either team , leading to a bizarre conclusion in which both sides threw everything into attack .
Running a theatre was a massive risk .
and I thought # 17.53 a month was a lot for a phone !
Every vet I 've had ( have moved a few times , it 's not that I 'm choosy about vets ! ) have said that between the first and second season for a bitch is the best time , and small dogs can be neutered earlier than big breeds , as the biggies need to mature both physically and emotionally .
Sustaining a tone is the result of audibly sustaining the thought underlying it .
A projection is a way of translating a three-dimensional real surface into a two-dimensional picture like a map .
Almost chewing off a finger is a substantial clinical sign , so as a result the dose for one group was lowered .
A lurcher is a cross breed , not a pedigree , though some can look very like a greyhound or deerhound or whatever , so maybe if a lurcher ' appears ' very greyhound looking they would be classed as a pedigree under these rules ?
Problems its not coilpack sparks exhaust blowing ( i know stupid but still a test is a test ) air mass sensor ( i unplugged it and took it for a spin until 90 c ) PLEASE Can anyone shed any light or ideas ?
nah , all you need for a claim is a crime reference number .
Also I want to say that anyone who is a surrogate is doing an amazing thing , a child is the most precious gift you can give .
In Q 4 1959 the annual increase reached 5 % for the first time and despite some small falls on a quarterly basis there was then an unbroken run of increases in every single 12 month period from Q 1 1955 to Q 2 1990 and by the time Only Fools and Horses hit maximum popularity on our screens everyone in the UK who owned a property was a millionaire .
When I lost one of my GSD 's I made the decision that the day she did n't want to go for a walk was the day I would let her go .
( 3 ) Section 838 ( subsidiaries ) shall apply for the purpose of determining whether a company is a 100 % subsidiary company of an Association but construing references in section 838 ( 1 ) ( b ) to 75 per cent as to 100 % .
I think Colin 's idea of a book is a good one and there would be no red-tape implications with this .
Many sources say that brood and a half is a pain and double brood is better !
I used to get every illness going around in the worst possible way , so a slight cold brought in by a colleague was a week off work for me with a terrible sore throat and pus all over my tonsils .
Being able to switch off if there is a malfunction is an advantage too , enabling me to sort out the problem " at leisure " :laughing: .
The main reason for a battery Isolator on boats is because unlike a motor caravan a boat is a unventilated enclosure that is liable to hold explosive vapours from leakes etc i.e. gas and fuel for this reason it is required to be able to turn of the 12 volt electrical supply quickly and safely .
No , realistically in an environment where a PC is a tool , a CPU upgrade really means a CPU + mobo upgrade ( and quite probably RAM too ) Personally I 'm in to stability rather than tweaking , and so even if my mobo is designed to be tweaked for speed and the processor is also thus designed , I run my chips at specification rates .
But now believe that the UK Government changing things on a macro-level is the way to go .
' While a vasectomy is a quick , straightforward procedure carried out by and large under local anaesthetic , reversals are a much bigger job , taking an hour and a half to perform and requiring a general anaesthetic or deep sedation , ' says John Lemberger , a consultant urological surgeon based in Nottingham .
However , whether the patient will be able to go on and start a family is another matter .
Bart 's fellow nominee , Nick Park , helps him realize that creating a film is a team effort , and Bart gives credit where credit is due .
An array of 32 - bit " relocations " to globals ; a relocation is a pair ( offest_into_bytearray , global_var ) .
People still think a rapist is a bad person who lives on the outside of society , who attacks strangers walking alone at night .
Ask yourself this : can a sysop be a vandal ?
Given that such a government is the only one possible for the parties involved , he was right to leave .
Because , Mr Key , $ 18.40 an hour is a much more reasonable increase than $ 30 an hour .
A genre is a constellation of patterns and signals-a flexible structure that helps make things legible without taking responsibility for their legibility , a structure that allows for big variation of messages and rhythms within it .
( A genre is a slow birth , not like an animal 's fast one . ) Privacy and novels share traits .
A mulatto is an offspring between a black and white parent .
The typical client of a moneylender is a parent who is trying to get money together to pay the electricity or gas bill , or cover a family event like a First Holy Communion or Christmas presents .
Purchasing a ticket is the easiest way to find out more about Matthew , Zend Framework and PHP in general .
In page layout software , a page is a single area of specific dimensions upon which text and images are arranged whether that page will ultimately be a single page or multiple pages once printed , cut , or folded .
Sometimes ignoring dialectics they often argue that the way to reach an aim is the only thing that truly counts .
A spade is a spade : darkness IS darkness in the world of the super hero and the edges are distinctly not blurred .
The violence there was often also perpetrated in a perfectly nonchalant manner , as if snuffing out a life were a mere errand , an item to check off from a to-do list .
We also find more and more that making up after a fight is the most exciting chapter and almost look forward to that moment even when we 're in the midst of an argument .
A third is a teacher that spent the class talking about pop psychology rather than the subject of the class .
Proving a theory is a dead end .
Therefor a TWebmodule is a TDataModule + TWebDispatcher .
The Jackal A jackal is an " animal of the dog kind , about the size of a fox ; one of various species of Canis ... inhabiting Asia and Africa , hunting in packs by night with wailing cries , and feeding on dead carcasses and small animals ; formerly supposed to go before the lion and hunt up his prey for him , hence termed ' the lion 's provider ' " ( OED ) .
According to the OED , a bumper is a " cup or glass of wine , etc. , filled to the brim , esp[ecially] when drunk as a toast " and derives from the word " bump , " in connection with a " ' bumping , ' i.e. [ a ] large , ' thumping ' glass .
A mantle is a " protective garment or blanket , " usually a " loose sleeveless cloak " ( OED ) .
Nonetheless , the capability for embedding images into a webpage was an integral part of the earliest instantiations of Hypertext Mark-up Language ( HTML ) .
A farmer is both worker and the boss , so it is difficult for him to strike against himself .
The two main formats for preparing a plan are the Gantt chart and CPM or PERT chart .
Another factor that backs up the necessity of creating a register is the public perception of the lobbying and public affairs industry .
Sleeping 8 hrs a night is a nice concept , but there 's too much going on , even if I 'm home sick some days .
I know , fans are saying a win is a win .
A city is a city if it is lived-in : otherwise it is merely a pile of bricks , cables and concrete .
Cycle touring with a tent is a great way to see and explore a country .
The inability to admit a mistake is a sure sign of ego .
Not that I 'm knocking it - whoever it was in the Oxfam marketing department who came up with the idea of packaging aid as a present was a fund raising genius .
I was referred to a specialist , who explained that if the aim was to retain fertility a myomectomy was the best option , he was much better at explaining the condition and treatment and both myself and my partner felt we trusted his opinion .
the Gynaecologist said that a myomectomy was the only way forward , and I would have to have this before IVF could practically be considered .
When the person at the head of an organisation is an inept communicator , the communications practitioner is presented with an unusual problem : how to mitigate the damage and make sure audiences are engaged .
A snoot is a fantastic lighting accessory designed to creatively direct and control an artificial beam of light , perfect for a beauty shot for example .
A phrase is a group of words which acts as a single unit in meaning and in grammar , and is not built round a verb .
A phrase is an expansion of one of the words inside it , which is called its head .
Juanda , your belief in a god is a delusion which many people do not share .
On display as something of a totem was the cavalry saddle used by Swiss rider Otto Schwarz on his epic 48,000 km ride through six continents .
Stopping terrorism as a whole is a pretty futile objective .
I do n't know a single woman that thinks a man is a " stud " for sleeping around , he 's far more likely to receive the taunt " get thee to a GUM clinic " .
A hoax is an untruth same as a piece of propaganda in some cases - this is all i meant .
The reason I ask is , as a southerner , I was always lead to believe a swede was the larger of the two - being brownish / mauve in colour and a turnip was the smaller and white with a green top .
Originally posted by Ellybum The reason I ask is , as a southerner , I was always lead to believe a swede was the larger of the two - being brownish / mauve in colour and a turnip was the smaller and white with a green top .
:hihi: A Swede is a person from Sweden , and a turnip is a vegetable .
He was immensely moved , writing later in his journal : " The common people felt his merits and his power and the common people of a country are the best feelings of a prophesy of futurity .
Hello ;) What 's wrong with a girl being a filth fan ?
Being a mother is a wonderful privelige and one which you clearly do n't take lightly ( or you would n't be so torn by this decision ) .
I do n't think you are being charged enough , when I go into a hotel room the last thing I want is the smell of stale dog , and before you go on about yours being house trained a dog is a dog not something for hotels other than pet hotels aka kennels .
Originally posted by owdlad I do n't think you are being charged enough , when I go into a hotel room the last thing I want is the smell of stale dog , and before you go on about yours being house trained a dog is a dog not something for hotels other than pet hotels aka kennels .
AIUI arachnophobia is an irrational fear of spiders so perhaps a few sessions with a psychiatrist is the long term solution ?
Originally posted by depoix i would reply that a crime is a crime and should be treated as such those with nothing to hide have nothing to fear , but will i be fobbed off ?
the law says that the property owner is responsible for the well bieng of any person in or invited onto their property , and there goods if stolen or damaged my main point is a crime is a crime .
no wopnder so many crimes go unsolved with an attitude like yours ... a crime is a crime and needs to be investigated , the phone was stolen from a locked office , some one must have had / borrowed the key , it wouldnt take sherlock homes to figure that out now would it ?
Originally posted by depoix no wopnder so many crimes go unsolved with an attitude like yours ... a crime is a crime and needs to be investigated , the phone was stolen from a locked office , some one must have had / borrowed the key , it wouldnt take sherlock homes to figure that out now would it ?
Originally posted by depoix no wopnder so many crimes go unsolved with an attitude like yours ... a crime is a crime and needs to be investigated , But there are a limited number of policemen .
well i certainly know who feels what about crime after reading some of these posts , i would like to say that in my opinion a crime is a crime and should be persued to the end , some on here believe it to be a waste of manpower , so where do we draw the line ?
£ 1000 * Parking on a pavement is an offence under local by-laws in some areas and you could receive a fine .
A car is an object , a person is not .
But for those who stayed with Marcos to the very end , such an excuse is an obscene plain as day lie .
There was a crucial idea lurking above - that a ring is a gismo RR which allows you to take any polynomial f ∈ ℤ [ x 1 , ...
For instance , the space of smooth functions on a manifold is a C ∞ C ^ \ infty-ring ... but so is ℂ[ϵ] / ϵ 2 \ mathbb{C} [ \ epsilon ] / \ epsilon ^ 2 !
If I have not sold the RV might well be towing a caravan is this possible ?
I suppose a biography is the best place to start !
I always say something like , a turtle is a turtle , a turtle is not a moose , and therefore , were it capable of wanting to , could never truly know what it 's like to be a moose .
" But a goal is a goal and we could have been three or four down at half-time .
A brain is a piece of mind-matter , a subspecies of matter in general .
A brain is a celestial object with more bizarre properties than any black hole or red dwarf or infinitely dense singularity .
Keeping a journal was a good idea .
An exception is the so-called " spindle neuron " , found in the anterior cingulate cortex , a region located deep within the central divide between the two hemispheres .
A bong is a big angle piton made from sheet metal that is folded in half in widths from two inches to four inches .
At least when one is painting trees , they do n't argue about whether a branch is too long or a leaf is the right colour !
" We would n't know whether a student is a secret terrorist or whether they watch bats in their spare time , " said Catheryn Cotten , director of international students at Duke University in Durham , N.C. The school is part of a pilot program , coordinated by the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service , seeking to provide better monitoring of international students .
A telomere is an urgent need for effective management of fibromyalgia .
A warrior is a person who does things quickly .
A goal is a state , not an activity .
Hence , good lipid solubility of a drug is an important factor in assessment of its absorption potential .
A week is a long time in politics but five years is an eternity and a half .
A poster is an abstract of your research , so it 's a waste of space to have an abstract on your abstract .
Unlike a manuscript , the introduction of a poster is a wonderful place to put a photograph or illustration that communicates some aspect of your research question .
Object art is alienated from the heart-beat of the painterly subject ; however , incantations of love sung next to a painting is a poet 's prayer calling the People 's spiritual heart back to the surface .
If a color is a primary carrier of information and is confused or not seen , transfer of information is severely restricted .
" : a graph or a table is a signifier of scienciness , as you might say .
The pale yellow eye in an orange is a great point against it winning in the keen competition which we have at the present time .
There is " some authority in international law for the proposition that if a man is a duly commissioned agent of his government , albeit without diplomatic immunity , any illegal acts he performs within the scope of his duties may still be considered not his personal violations but his government 's national acts , raising questions public and political between independent nations .
■ Record information as seen ( note an animal is a crime scene in its own right ) .
Clearly visible on the roof of a building is a section that is not covered by snow suggesting the presence of a strong heat source .
However I also more generally disagree with you ; I cant see how a currency being all electronic would be more vulnerable than the hybrid we have at the moment .
The necessary implication of undertaking a journey is a useless deduction in the wake of evidential reports concerning the validity of undertaking a journey to Masjid an-Nabawi anyway .
The only thing that can simulate the sound of a vuvuzela is a 30 - pound mosquito .
An example is this statement that appears as an irrelevant aside about Lafayette Baker in Nash 's item on Allan Pinkerton : " ...
In a lot of ways , an iPad is the perfect vehicle for storing and retrieving information while on the road .
This is really interesting as I have heard Bush 's appearance as a dimwit was an act .
An example is a project that was passed when Mr .
A garden is an incredibly beautiful and romantic setting , so little additional décor will be necessary .
The recompense for an injury is an injury equal thereto ( in degree ) , but if a person forgives and makes reconciliation , his reward is due from God , for God loves not those who do wrong .
Making a professional and unique resume before applying for a job is an unavoidable formality of a job search .
To visualize the state of a country is an amazing concept !
Basically an intellectual is a person who uses intelligence ( thought and reason ) and critical or analytical thinking , either in a professional or a personal capacity .
According to materialism , a belief is a neural structure of some kind -- a structure that somehow possesses content .
taking Ibraheem as a khaleel is an attribute of action .
He defended his credentials Tuesday , saying his 21 years as an alderman are the equivalent of being mayor of a community with 58,000 people and has given him executive experience .
A katana is a very bad choice in this situation not because it is primarily a slashing weapon , but because it is sharp , rigid , and brittle , and will break after a few swings against plate armor .
Jim Glass 's post could be read as saying that it is specifically Communists who have retarded development so much that , for many people , working in a sweatshop is the best option .
A prognosis is the likely outcome of a disease based on a diagnosis .
Another reason why using the costs as a justification is a bad argument .
A patent is a grant by the state that gives license to its holder to use the state 's courts and police to force competitors not to use their own property in certain ways .
When a writer makes a blatant statement that because a comic is a woman she should n't express herself as raunchily as a male comic , that 's sexism , and it deserves to be called out .
" Everything I do as an astronaut are the things I enjoy doing , " Caldwell Dyson said .
Development of such a program is a performance measure of the Health Resources and Services Administration ( HRSA ) national EMSC program .
Federal , state , and local taxes and any expenses relating to the acceptance and use of a scholarship are the responsibility of the individual winners .
A cookie is a piece of data stored on the user 's hard drive containing information about the user .
Each and everyday for a Kashmiri was a day of struggle and uncertainty .
[ An example is a foreign institution which complies with guidelines consistent with the World Medical Assembly Declaration ( Declaration of Helsinki amended 1989 ) issued either by sovereign states or by an organization whose function for the protection of human research subjects is internationally recognized .
A privateer was a pirate .
The sound that emanates from a conch is the sound of the sacred syllable AUM , which is said to be the sound of creation .
A quaternion is a 4 - tuple which can be regarded as a scalar plus a vector .
An ecig is a battery-powered device that simulates smoking tobacco .
Consider the circumstances The other scientific definition that makes sense is to acknowledge that by any classification scheme that considers circumstances -- where the object is , what else is in orbit near by , whether an object is a satellite -- the first eight planets are clearly in a class of their own .
There are many ways to attempt to state this definition : a planet is by far the dominant mass in its region of space , a planet has cleared its neighborhood of all other significant masses , a planet is the accumulation of most of the material in its orbital vicinity .
Any slight peep through the curtains into an interior is an invasion of privacy to be avoided .
The only other total artificial heart now available for use in a patient is the AbioCor , which was approved by the FDA for investigational use in 15 patients .
A polygon is a closed figure made by joining line segments , where each line segment intersects exactly two others .
A vertex is the point where two sides of a polygon meet .
A plane is a flat , two-dimensional object .
The radius of a circle is the distance from the circle 's center to a point on the circle , and is constant for a given circle .
A circle is the set of all points in a plane that are equidistant from a given point in the plane .
A sphere is a figure with all points the same distance frome the center .
A cube is a three-dimensional shape with six square or rectangular sides .
A cone is a figure created by connecting every point of a circle to a point not in the plane of the circle .
A pyramid is a figure created by connecting every point of a polygon to a point not in the plane of the polygon .
Still , a compliment was a compliment .
But this mode of refreshing a treasury is no novelty in any part of the east ; and I well remember the noseless and one-eyed victims of Djezzár to be seen in the streets of Acre .
Owning a horse is a responsibility that should not be taken lightly .
The Maori legend of Pouakai no doubt refers to the Haast 's eagle and bone remains have been found within human midden sites ( a midden is a mound of domestic refuse marking the site of a human settlement ) .
An orange is a sweet and juicy fruit .
Some people think a poem is a good one only if , after reading it ten to twenty times , it still delivers a new perspective , connection , or coordinated image .
A serger is a handy dandy foot for your sewing machines .
Just casue a player is a top 5 pick does n't mean he needs to play in the NHL , just look at Drouin .
Not even a month ago , running two minutes at a time was a struggle-now I can run without stopping for more than a half hour .
Father ' a Day is this Sunday ( 6 / 15 ) ...
Dean met Cassie after Sam left for college which we know for a fact was a tremendously difficult time for him - he has a tendency to internalize concepts such as ' blame ' and ' guilt ' and ' failure ' and Sam leaving played into all of that .
But it would be fantastic if women like this could remember that a gift is a gesture .
reply - Dear expectant parents to be , Did n't realise YOUR child came with a fee to me , A shower is a chance to celebrate a new life , And this sense of entitlement and greed is why the world is in such strife , So my gift whether judged worthy by you or not , Is to develop some gratitude and thanks for what you 've already got !
A patent is a document , issued by the federal government , that grants to its owner a legally enforceable right to exclude others from making , using or selling the invention claimed in the document in the United States for a term of 17 years .
The proper subject matter of a patent is any product , process , apparatus or composition of matter , including living matter such as genetically engineered bacteria or plans .
The next step in the process of obtaining a patent is the preparation of a patent application .
COMMENTS : A Jeep is a must !!!
Hurting a person is the opposite of healing .
A mentor is an invaluable resource .
A Blind Date with a Book is a surprise book mailed to you wrapped like an old vintage package !
One of the things I did find hiding behind a carton was a small can of chipotle peppers in adobo sauce .
While it would be disingenuous to say that a chunk of money that allows you to buy a house is a bad thing , the work of one 's early 20 's is perhaps best done on a limited budget .
Obviously this is not intended as an argument against reducing the number of errors to be found by QA , but still ... a bug is a bug .
Gawking at the inside of a coffin is the end result for all those who follow humanity in its natural form .
A word is a thought put in action , The power that gives birth to thought .
" -- scans better ] Yet an orphan 's a sad sight and so when I munch .
Especially with Chr it is imperative that one exercise extreme care in deciding whether a citation is a real one .
It is important to realize materials as textual witness one must keep in mind that a version is a translation from a different language .
@ aiww : A writer is a liar if he ca n't face truth ; a literary prize is a curse on conscience if it shuns the question of justice .
The " cells and bells " model assumes that a teacher is the caregiver , counsellor and educator , who performs the roles at the same time .
An example is the plotting of four fields on one frame field = ' 0 ' ; subplot = 221 ; plotxy ( ) field = ' 1 ' ; subplot = 222 ; plotxy ( ) field = ' 2 ' ; subplot = 223 ; plotxy ( ) field = ' 3 ' ; subplot = 224 ; plotxy ( ) overplot -- Overplot on current plot ( if possible ) default : False ; example : overplot= True showflags -- Show the flagged and unflagged data .
One of the demonstrations that won an award was a presentation on a waste handling system for radioactive 32 P work .
I too am facinated with Mary Magdeline but baseing ones ideas on a novel is a tricky proposition .
A bullock is a male calf and is known for his strength .
If running a race is a resolutions goal of yours , check out Chicago Endurance Sports No Boundaries training program for beginner runners or those wanted to get back into running , or the group 's Half Marathon training program .
" The lower end for this kind of a research is a text collection of 100 million words , " she explained .
Suggesting that an event was an " act of God " may be a defence in English law against a claim for liability since it could not have been foreseen or safeguarded against .
Inward cusp : A point is an inward cusp if its inside angle exceeds 180 .
An army is a voracious beast that consumes all the food and wood in range , and it is well known that a hungry army is less capable of loyalty than even the lowest beast .
An example is a negative US for pneumothorax after post-transbronchial or post-transthoracic lung biopsy eliminates the need for CXR .
An exception is the radio regime .
Rapid and accurate transfers of information can be a life and death matter for many people ( an example being the Challenger disaster ) .
The SaaS model has been very successful because one would expect the people who know the best way to deliver an application are the ones who developed the application to begin with .
It is asserted on page 53 that a buffer is a solution with an approximately constant pH .
An ecosystem is a fundamental unit of nature that includes living organisms and their non-living environment .
One of my most prized possessions as a child was a wizard Christmas tree ornament-Judith loved wizards-that she gave me one Christmas .
switching play styles in the middle of a game is an enormous and interesting challenge and it made the game more worthwhile to me , but the character you choose will have some hard limits .
There is no reason in the world why a requirement that a person be a citizen for a job should be onerous , or at least on the track to citizenship , have a green card , something .
If a blockbuster was the plan , then Jiang 's success is unmitigated .
One definition of a housewife is a married woman who cares for her family , manages household affairs , and does housework as her main occupation .
Keep up the great work .. a dictionary is some time a very good thing as you do use words that boggle some of our minds .
After all , a monitor is a musical instrument of sorts .
A palette is a palette by individual choice and that 's fine but I want to see if they know how to work with their palette .
[ Editor ] A skunk is a skunk by whatever name it is called , just as sin is sin , whether it is called disease , alternate lifestyle or whatever .
Whether or not you think the amount of storage space on a record is a limitation , the amount of good-sounding space on the disc is important to consider .
A species is a group of living organisms that can interbreed .
A lens is a custom view of the content in the repository .
Similarly , the current in a wire is a measure of how much electricity is going through it per second .
A commission is a collaboration between the client and the artist .
And to quote John Singer Sargent : " A portrait is a painting when there is something wrong with the mouth .
" A weapon is a weapon , " the ghost said .
The voltages add up , just as the height of a house is the sum of the heights of its stories .
Cloud Standards - A standard is an agreed-upon approach for doing something .
Conducting a workshop is a serious obligation and a responsibility .
Robert , you are so correct when you stated teaching a workshop is a serious obligation .
Making an extremely hard vacuum in a tube is a lengthy process , so most modern tubes compromise at a level of vacuum that is adequate for the tube 's application .
Thus , a cell is the smallest living entity you can find ( viruses are much smaller but ca n't reproduce themselves without a cell ) .
A protein is a chain of amino acids .
Since the biologist 's definition of a species is a group of populations that will interbreed , we obviously have two very closely related biological species here .
And particulars will be metaphysically deficient , at least to the extent that possessing an essence is a better state than lacking one .
A second is the contingent way in which the particular has this determinate property .
It explores the question what is Justice over the course of ten books , with the aim of demonstrating that the best life for a human is the life devoted to virtue and knowledge , for such a life will result in happiness for the individual .
An essence is a universal , an object of thought , not a material force .
The range of values of the variables of quantification of a theory is the theory 's universe .
A bus is a wire , set of wires , or fiber .
A hub is a little box that knows how to connect different wires / fibers plugged into it ; switched hubs allow multiple connections to be actively transmitting data simultaneously .
According to Israeli regulations a tourist is a person who entered Israel with a foreign passport and whose passport was stamped with class B 1 B 2 or B 3 Visa .
I 'm a journalist by profession and have written numerous features and reports , so I think , for me , a novel was the next step .
A fiddler is an important member of the band for ceilidh dances along with the accordion , and plays alone for step dancing , a traditional dance style in Cape Breton , Canada , which has had a revival in Scotland , after having left along with the emigrants in the last century .
This little trick of repeating a phrase just before he makes a point is a favorite one with Mark Twain .
A frame is a data-structure for representing a stereotyped situation , like being in a certain kind of living room , or going to a child 's birthday party .
In the tradition of Guzman and Winston , we assume that the result of looking at a cube is a structure something like that in figure 1.1 .
" Buying a property and taking on a mortgage is a significant life event with a high level of financial commitment , so it 's critical to look at protecting your financial position , so that if anything happens to you , your family can keep their home and manage financially .
A reagent is a substance added to another in the laboratory to cause a chemical reaction , particularly to detect another substance .
An example is the experience of Corporal Pearl Chandley who acted as part of President Woodrow Wilson^s bodyguard during a White House parade and whose recollection of the day is partly about having concealed in her skirt pocket a chocolate bar that melted during the heat .
January 29 , 2014 A budget is a neccessary evil that all adults need .
" Well , well , in my deed , a marvel is this truly , " said Gwri .
A rotation is an acceleration , and within an inertial frame of reference we can determine whether we are spinning or not .
A special case of a transverse wave in a liquid are the waves we see on the surface of water in the ocean .
We can only imagine this in terms of a circle , which is why this kind of geometry is also called " elliptical , " i.e. in that a circle is a kind of ellipse -- the class of conic sections that are closed curves .
On the surface of a sphere , it is not difficult to draw a triangle were each corner is itself 90 o , which , with a sum of 270 o , blows away the Euclidean theorem that the interior angles of a trangle equal 180 o .
The orbit of a planet is a closed curve .
Thus , although the surface of a sphere is an excellent model of a non-Euclidean geometry in the sense that it does not distort the shapes or sizes of figures that we move around on it , nevertheless does not make for a persuasive case that intrinsic curvature is actually unrelated to extrinsic curvature .
A rotation is an acceleration in a significant way .
Dr James Neuberger , NHSBT Associate Medical Director , said : " Allocating organs fairly , in a transparent way , and ensuring that patients receive the maximum benefit from a transplant are the main aims of the UK organ allocation schemes .
The ideal audience member for a performance is a sensitive soul , a true aesthete , who will be deeply affected by the drama if not moved to tears .
This generalizes in an appropriate manner to a so called safe interpretation over any linearly ordered BL-algebra and definition of the truth value ||φ|| M , L given by the L-interpretation M. A formula is a general BL-tautology in the predicate logic BL∀ if its truth value is 1 in each safe interpretation .
A t-norm is a particular operation x * y with arguments and values in the real unit interval [ 0,1 ] .
The characteristics of a wine that can either resemble or contrast with the characteristics of a dish are the wine 's flavors : Earthy , herbal , fruity , vegetal , and so on .
" One of the problems with the process is that I think in the beginning we basically spoke the language in which the country had a psyche , and that a country is the same as an individual ... in that the truth about the country will help heal in the same way we might say that dealing with your own personal truth in therapy might heal you , " he says .
« Briefly , a metaphor is an affair between a predicate with a past and an object that yields while protesting .
Goodman introduces this distinction in the context of his analysis of pictorial signs ; ' representation ' means for him ' pictorial sign ' : « A picture that represents a man denotes him ; a picture that represents a fictional man is a man-picture ; and a picture that represents a man as a man is a man-picture denoting him .
Thus , Goodman could try to explain in which sense the metaphorical use of a sign is a use with deference to its literal use by referring to the sign token which , while being transfered from one realm of objects to another , does stay a sign of the same kind .
What makes a sentence which is literally false a metaphor is a particular way of its being used : « What distinguishes metaphor is not meaning , but use ... .
The interpretion of conceptual meaning of a term is a process which can be described as a working out or bringing about its possible connotations .
A woman 's a fool to marry for that .
Caja had a Nat test that tested that a number was a primitive integer within the range of continguously representable non-negative integers .
Note that a self-loop is a back edge 3 .
A box is a cube so to speak .
quote : Originally posted by hurricaneflyer A box is a cube so to speak .
A cover with or without a door is the difference .
The principle can be related as follows : the optimal solution to a problem is a combination of optimal solutions to some of its subproblems .
( Madigan , 457 ) In the baker 's yeast they have a strain were the production of carbon dioxide is more prevalent then ethanol and vice versa for brewing .
• A photograph is a secret about a secret .
It is important to bear in mind that an improvement is a physical and not an economic concept .
Essentially , an icon is an expression of the painter 's religious faith , within the tightly defined Church teachings .
Such a distinction is a difficult one to make , for disease implies a condition where the normal host functions disrupted ( Holliday 1989 ) .
In XQL , a document is an ordered , labelled tree , with nodes to represent the document entity , elements , attributes , processing instructions , and comments .
The result of a query is a table containing a set of rows ; this table may serve as the basis for further queries .
The result of a query is a list of XML document nodes , which may serve as the basis for further queries .
A standard learning tool commonly used in Japan to aid in memorizing important parts of a text is the " Concealing Memorization Sheet " .
His most distinctive innovation as a colourist was the discovery of the scarlet shadow " ( 7.413 ) .
A History of the Dishwasher A dishwasher is an appliance / person used for washing plates , dishes , forks , spoons and other ...
A nihilist is a person who does not bow down to any authority , who does not accept any principle on faith , however much that principle may be revered .
The third reason for a reminder is the portion that we receive .
Buying an annuity is an important decision , so it 's vital to understand the charges or fees that could affect the premium payments / income benefit .
An algorithm is a set of rules for carrying out calculation either by hand or on a machine .
An algorithm is a finite step-by-step procedure to achieve a required result .
An algorithm is a sequence of computational steps that transform the input into the output .
An algorithm is a sequence of operations performed on data that have to be organized in data structures .
An algorithm is an abstraction of a program to be executed on a physical machine ( model of Computation ) .
The complexity of an algorithm is a function g(n) that gives the upper bound of the number of operation ( or running time ) performed by an algorithm when the input size is n .
Another technique for estimating the complexity of a problem is the transformation of problems , also called problem reduction .
The common law definition of a partnership is an association of persons who join together their money , goods , labor or skill for conducting a trade or business and sharing the profits and losses from it .
The Jamboree as a whole was an incredible experience which I shall never forget .
More accurately , a firewall is a way of enforcing a policy or a set of rules governing the flow of data packets to and from the outside world .
The ability to work on a team is a crucial workplace skill .
A mammogram is a breast X-ray .
A solvent is a liquid in which a substance dissolves .
A solute is a substance that dissolves in a liquid .
A solution is a liquid with a substance dissolved in it .
She said : " Achieving a diploma is a measure of excellence so this is hugely significant for Rowena .
They can cause vehicle damage and taking them accurately diminishes a driver 's all round attention .
Condensation polymerisation : The polymers formed by condensation reactions ( See Polymer Chemistry ) of a dibasic acid and a diamine are the PA 6 / 6 types of PA .
Society as a whole is the poorer .
Mid-life crisis is not a crisis-it is a passage into joy .
A time-stamp is a zero-length file whose only purpose is to record its creation time .
There are still a number of farmers who think that to have any weeds at all in a field is a sign of bad farming , when in fact a certain level may have no adverse affect upon the crop .
Simple ions are atoms which lose electrons to become positive ions and gain electrons to become negative ions Relative Atomic Mass The relative atomic mass of an element is the average mass of one atom taking account of each isotope and the abundance of each isotope , because of this the relative atomic mass is rarely a whole number .
Because a putt is the terminal shot on every hole and there is no possibility of recovery from short misses , putts count almost a disproportionate amount ..
An angel in truth , a demon in fiction , A woman 's the greatest of all , Contradiction .
A fine is a tax for doing wrong .
A tax is a fine for doing well .
Memory was something you lost with age An Application was for employment A Programme was a TV show A Cursor was a profanity A Keyboard was a piano A Web was a spider 's home A Virus was the flu A Hard Drive was a long trip on the road A Mouse Pad was where a mouse lived And if you had a 3 inch floppy ... you just hoped nobody ever found out !
The other similar reform that has been denied so much as a mention is the ever deepening stratum of taxation in the price level .
To check whether a website is an official sales channel please use the following website checker .
Basil Spence became Sir Basil Spence - a knighthood being a standard accolade for virtually all designers of cathedrals .
Pan or Tilt Shot A pan is a good way to break the cycle of shot / reverse-shot of conventional editing .
Comparing one 's life to a road is a very wide-spread metaphore : this is sort of what Jonathan Kaczynski did , by presenting his resume in a form of a subway map .
Broadly , a ghost is an echo of the past , I suppose .
The evolving role of an electrician was the theme of the day as hundreds of contractors packed out Epsom Downs for the second NICEIC Live .
A tremor is a repetitive movement of a part of the body .
I suppose the surrender of Japan could be looked at as the beginning of a darker atomic age , but at the time , there were a lot of Happy Americans celebrating VJ Day , and the end of a war is a good thing .
A non-birth is a complete nothingness , it cannot be compared with life .
In NLP a value is a feeling - either of something we want more of , or something we want to move away from i.e. less stress , more stability , feeling healthy , not feeling lonely etc. People are at their happiest when they are living to their own personal values , so it 's a good place to start .
Hitchcock demonstrated in Psycho that empathy with a victim is the key to scaring the living daylights out of an audience .
Representing a plane is a little less intuitive , but we can do it using a ( 3 D ) vector to represent the normal to the plane , as well as a value to represent the distance to the origin ( in the direction of the normal ) .
The surface of a route is the responsibility of the Highway Authority .
A wig is the traditional option for baldness .
So the 120 with a box is the same as a 150 ?
The argument that a fertilized ovum develops into a zygote is a straw man .
Ask any physicist whether an electron is a wave or a particle and he will concede that is at once ' neither and something of both ' .
A speaker is an item you can sell , so if you have your shop open , and use a speaker then surely it become un-clickable , unless you do it when the shop is closed , and you are placing items in it , would n't clicking the speaker just place it in the shop ?
" The chance to do an apprenticeship was the right match because it means I am still in college but working towards building my own career at the same time .
A hypothesis is an explanation for a set of observations .
The provision now states that " agency resources available to a program or component " are to be considered in determining whether an action is an undue burden .
While the Board acknowledges that these may be appropriate factors for consideration by an agency in determining whether an action is an undue burden , factors ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) were not based on established caselaw or existing regulations under section 504 .
A script is a programmatic set of instructions that is downloaded with a web page and permits the user 's computer to share the processing of information with the web server .
The child support enforcement agency for a county is the local Title IV-D agency for the county and shall operate a program for support enforcement in the county that complies with Title IV-D of the " Social Security Act , " 88 Stat 2351 ( 1975 ) , 42 U.S.C. 651 , as amended , any rules adopted pursuant to that title , and state law .
Each lexer has several lexical states , and each of those can be assigned a different visual style ( for example , in the C++ lexer , a comment is a state , so you might want to assign it a different colour and font ; a preprocessor line is also a state which you would usually choose to colour differently ; and so on and so forth ) .
I find setting a timer is the only way to give my life the structure it now needs .
A brushstroke is the artist 's touch , the artist 's will , exercised on paper , and according to his skill and concept , the stroke will be intoxicating and life-enhancing or dull and flat .
A show is a culmination of a period of hard work .
Showing in a museum is a big deal , even if it is only small and local .
An ethical sympathy in an artist is an unpardonable mannerism of style .
And , I thought a cola was a cola was a cola .
A reward is a reward .
By integrating all of the available information , Williams Midstream can determine where the risks of an incident are the greatest , and make prudent decisions to reduce these risks .
Well , I think about 1 / 2 a rottie is the equivalent to 1 JRT .
A draw was the very least Crawley deserved - although the three points should really have been theirs long before the hosts got themselves back in the game with an equaliser just before half-time .
Unfortunately , Billy Clarke 's shot straight at him in the opening quarter of an hour was a taste of much similar to come .
One of the things which really must be avoided on a car is the use of a Stainless which is susceptible to stress corrosion cracking in a chloride ( salt ! ) environment - this is n't such an issue with aeroplanes .
Absolute newsreader Andrew Bailey , who was tasked with finding the perfect location for his contribution , said : " Reading the news from a port-a-loo is a real career highlight !
i hardly think a muzzle was the answer to that particular situation .
After loosing Jake 2 weeks ago I know that a house without a dog is a very empty one .
An ex-partner who has been lied to , cheated and dumped and refused an explanation is the real victim of emotional abuse , no wonder can escalate to violence if the dumped person then gets accused of stalking and has their lives wrecked on top of the hurt .
I 'm not surprised by the student bashing , as most people here seem to like complaining about anything and everything ( and then claim that we as a city are the friendliest in the country ! ) .
Professor Gupta believes the way a procedure is ' sold ' to a patient is the key .
Running a network is an overhead " .
" The notable thing about Mr Rudd 's enthusiasm for a republic is the fact that the people of Australia do n't share it , " he insisted .
The industry term for a call terminated by the customer while waiting for a pick-up is an Abandoned Call .
A paddle is a plastic card bearing a number that is registered at the auction .
We were not at our best but to get a win is a good sign .
- Sophie , Cambridge , 30 / 5 / 2011 13:07 13:07 I ca n't believe I 've found another girl who thinks the same way as I do ... with every guy I 've gone out with I 've always made it clear from the offset that sex will not be the first item on the agenda ... a relationship is a slow process , you get to know eachother first before doing the deed .
I do n't agree with it , but in interview situations not turning up in a suit is an instant reason not to employ you , you did n't matter and it was nothing to do with your rugged good looks although I did laugh when I read that so thanks for that haha !
Can a prisoner be a councillor at the same time ?
Becoming a manager is a journey .
HOWEVER , a win is a win , and this time they are going to the European Championships with no great expectations from anyone , so that could be a help !
A calendar is a précis of the document , in English , and fully indexed .
I have sympathy with infertile couples , but nobody said that having a child is a right .
The Police will be able to track down the driver , perhaps with the use of CCTV , as failure to stop at the scene of an accident is a criminal offence .
Simply changing the OS clock forward or back an hour is a poor test as it is changing the root OS time , and the time zone adjustments ( made through calls to the OS libraries ) are being bypassed .
- A compromise is an agreement whereby both parties get what neither of them wanted .
" Seizures A seizure is a spontaneous , uncontrolled , neurological activity .
Internet advertising as a model is a joke - the ability to audit every click online means advertisers see clearly how little ROI they actually get for their online adspend and from the user end ads are trivially easy to block .
@ laughingbuddha ' Internet advertising as a model is a joke - the ability to audit every click online means advertisers see clearly how little ROI they actually get for their online adspend and from the user end ads are trivially easy to block .
A misdemeanour is a category of crime .
A hormone is a chemical which is made in one part of the body but passes into the bloodstream and has effects on other parts of the body .
It 's not about pity , I 've been there myself , and the fact is a person is a person .
Credo [ disambiguation ] A credo is a statement of belief , especially of a religious nature .
Or at least I have n't on these forums Whether the Court would accept such a request is another matter of course , however I suspect the answer from the DCA would be most revealing ...
Hi can anyone tell me what the costs of a blood test to see if my horse is a rig is these days .
Luckily , plain vanilla telephones rarely malfunction - the availability of a signal is the variable factor .
A wick is a piece of gauze material which is soaked in antibiotic drops .
A Chromebook is a different type of laptop .
A cold is an infection of the nose and upper airways caused by a virus .
A bibliography is a list of references to books or sometimes to articles in journals .
A review is a summary of what has been happening in a subject over a number of years ( sometimes a single year ) , with a list of references to the original articles .
All i need after i get a carb is the ignition system , and the pump .
An interface is a definition of a set of methods , and nothing more .
So an interface is a bunch of faces .
We learned that building such a system is a dynamic ongoing process , that often relies heavily on the good will and trust of the collaborating organizations .
Pushing back against Reid and forcing him to cut a deal is another leadership objective .
" A car is an incredibly small space , " said Hallet , in a phone interview Friday .
While this Web edition is complete , downloading the story file and an interpreter is the only real way to engage with Ad Verbum ; SAVE , RESTORE , and TRANSCRIPT are disabled in the Web interpreter .
Being intimidated by a subject is a serious hurdle to actually learning it .
Considering that a government is a public organization , all agreements signed with international organizations must be brought to the knowledge of the public immediately .
The option to follow people instead of add them as a friend is a bit stalkerish , but gaming " celebs " have never been more prevalent and crave the attention .
More of an issue is the lack of a dedicated Foxtel app .
Present at this Congress as a delegate is the former Minister of State Sccurity , Comrade Ignatiev .
So , taking images that these creepers have publicly uploaded of their own volition and turning them into a joke is the same or worse ?
A bonus is the " Signs of Life " feature-photos of garbled English translations on signs from across the world .
A bitstream is a sequential series of Blocks and Data Records .
When a value is an operand of an instruction , the value ID is used to represent the operand .
Thus , if an operand is the value defined by the previous instruction , the operand will be encoded as 1 .
MISS PETTIGREW LIVES FOR A DAY is a fluffy little comedy that calls heavily on its actors to make its characters amiable .
A potluck is all about participating .
Apparently alive to the fact that many people may question the rationale behind their judgment , more so in the light of the group 's demands , the judges pointed out that effecting a secession was a weighty matter that could not be realised through the means the group has been pursuing .
The terms for the parts of a moose are the same as the body part terms for other animals , with the exception of the dewlap or " goatee " , which is called dʌnitʃʌl .
It did not help matters in countries where qualification as a member is no automatic right , but requires acquaintance with the practices developed locally like active participation and other requirements for membership .
Like your previous posts said , a lawyer is a useful thing in court !
And I agree with the several other people who have said that knowing who to contact about a question is a significant issue .
In sf / fantasy , an empath is a person with the direct ability to experience another 's feelings ( empathy ) , while someone who is empathetic is just someone who tries to behave as if they understand and care about another 's feelings .
But I came to believe that a niche is a result of career success , not a cause , and you appear to agree with that assessment .
The value of such a form is some specific object which can only be computed in the run-time environment .
( b ) Interfering with an officer is a class A misdemeanor .
Building a business is a lot like peddling your ass .
Auburn University graduate Alfred Nelson , who , like Kopp , transferred after one semester in Ithaca and will finish his degree this month , agreed that applying a mindset is a key takeaway for him .
At Jason Wharam Photography , we understand that each client has different needs and choosing a photographer is an important decision ; you need to like their style / body of work .
A checkpoint is a consistent view of the system .
By default , the installation of a fallback is a global operation which either is performed all nodes with disc resident schema or none .
Yes , as Arrington pointed out , putting out a rumor is a way of testing its veracity .
The dosages need to be kept small however , with a 1 - milligram dose twice a day being the usual recommendation .
I 'm sure Apple ( and the fanboys ) will spin this so it looks like a simple mistake was made but in the the end a lie is a lie .
Ms Donnelly ( with Mr Kerida Naidoo BL ) , asked Judge Nolan to take into account that this was not a case were the immigrants were physically harmed as was the case in Rosslare Harbour were eight people died after they were smuggled in to Ireland in a crammed truck .
Paddling across the clear blue waters in a kayak is a spectacular way to explore the Marlborough Sounds on New Zealand 's South Island .
A podiatrist is a doctor of podiatric medicine ( DPM ) , also known as a podiatric physician or surgeon .
What you ca n't get away with when choosing a theme is the need to develop a basic understanding of how WordPress works - the difference between Posts , Pages , and Attachments , or between Categories and Tags .
A heretic is a man who sees with his own eyes .
The best gift I ever got as a kid was a week of Space Academy , complete with flying lessons .
I have to take it back since the thoughtless twerp who chose the IPod for a gift was the Queen Elizabeth .
Having a go is the best way to get started .
Sometimes an abortion is a blessing .
If you 're in a split speed river current - a switch is a mending machine .
An enemy is a bad witness : a robber is a worse .
You ca n't be a millionaire being an accupuncturist .
A nation is a mass of people sharing a common geographic territory , common culture , common history , and common aspirations .
I feel weak and unmotivated so food and a binge is an easy way to escape at least for a very short period of time .
Maybe hiring a kanene is the best course of action .
Xaser secretly a supercomputer being a government Joined : 20 Jul 2003 Location : .
Giving us a call is the ideal starting point !
Actor Brad Pitt , who this year became a father with his adoption of Angelina Jolie 's two adopted children and the birth of his own child , told a Today Show audience , " [ Becoming a father is the ] best thing I ever did .
Joseph Smith taught that " a prophet was a prophet only when he was acting as such " ( HC 5:265 5:265 ) .
Subhaulers - A subhauler is an owner - operator of a solitary tractor or could have a squadron of tractors which are rented to prime providers .
The influence of a loan is a great deal different than that of the small business lines of credit procedure on a company .
An optimist is a man who hopes they are .
Another reason to not make a full Cyrillic character set a priority is the fact that sales of fonts to that market are ridiculously low .
A configuration is an object that stores your common ( application level ) settings and defines certain variables that you want to be available in all templates .
A configuration is a freemar ker.tem pl ate.Con figuration instances , that you can create with its constructor .
I think making an effort is the most important thing !
A year and a half is a long time to be apart for an established couple , much less a fairly new one .
First , not everyone who bounces a check is a potential criminal .
A bikini is the same thing as a bathing suit , the only difference is showing some stomach , now what is wrong with that ?
But it depends if she like the two-peiced and its not revealing too much the yes its fine for a two - peice But a bikini is a different story .
But Coon also believes that if a company is a habitual offender , it should be criminally charged and even shut down .
The fundamental characteristic of a world is the distribution of that sort of degrees to all multiplicities which appear in this world .
" A neighborhood is a place , not a behavior .
Reducing the gap between a technical medical device and a child is an interesting itch .
The first few minutes after an offender attempts to capture a victim are the riskiest .
While the use of a motor vehicle to gain control of a victim is a rare occurrence , when it does happen , it often is overlooked or mischaracterized during an investigation .
This year the Republican punditry decided that in a poor economy a businessman was the ticket .
" In general , an LHD is an area with clear boundaries enclosing a contiguous set of historically or architecturally significant structures that are related through proximity , ownership , history or use and that together tend to visually represent the community 's heritage .
Raising your rates & firing a client are the two scariest things a freelancer has to do - but you 'll feel incredible when you work up the courage to do ' em .
Experience developers might think that building a queue is a tad complicated , because a typical queue requires , in addition to the queue itself , some locking mechanisms .
I tried the same approach with the centipede kingdom in Hawaii ... went to a heiau and made an offering to assuage my mortal fear of centipedes ... there was a tree growing through a giant rock and after prayers climbed the tree ... about 1 / 2 way up , resting on a branch was a perfect walking stick just pearched , like it was waiting for me ...
An injunction is a court order for a particular party to do or not do something , usually the latter .
The only thing I 've seen that 's even close to a bailout is the $ 44 Million GS Technology 's pension received from the PBGC , an insurance agency of the federal government that GS Technology and it 's predecessor Worldwide Grinding Systems would have had to pay into before then .
Whether a columnist is an intellect or an idiot depends on the prejudices , information , and misinformation present in the reader .
But I do realize such a reality is a hard pill for the psychiatric practitioners to swallow .
I was going to make the point that the primary meaning of enumeration seems to be ' ascertaining ' and that a census is a secondary meaning .
I should have expanded a bit before , but a bar was all I could muster .
Thus the relevance of a page is a reasonable indicator of the relevance of its neighbors , although the reliability of this rule falls off rapidly with increasing radius on an average .
A predicate is a verb that expresses the subject 's action or state of being .
A clause is a group of related words that contain a subject and predicate .
In ordinary English , a schema is defined as " an outline or image universally applicable to a general conception , under which it is likely to be presented to the mind ; as , five dots in a line are a schema of the number five ; a preceding and succeeding event are a schema of cause and effect " ( Websters ) .
Step 2 : Start Debugger - Right click on the project ( or use the " Run " menu ) ⇒ " Debug As " ⇒ " Local C / C + + Application " ⇒ choose " Yes " to switch into " Debug " perspective ( A perspective is a particular arrangement of panels to suits a certain development task such as editing or debugging ) .
If lying about a crime is a crime , then they , too , are innocent until proven guilty .
By comparison a minor " luxury tax " on owning a TV is a drop in the ocean .
Randomly : a table shaped like a continent is an AWESOME idea .
@ 66 When I 'm talking about at the Faith of the Seven as a monotheistic religion , I 'm asking the same question I ask about real-world religions : what kind of a belief system and an organization is this ?
Important to note : Of all the PUPs in existence , today , there is only 2 PUPs that provide a tool that can be used to give a user a " baseline " ( a baseline is a " starting point " ) for the video performance on their PC .
A prospectus is a document that describes the investment and the associated risks to the investor .
An acre-foot is the amount of water required to cover one acre to a depth of one foot , or approximately 326,000 gallons .
An example of such a process is the abstraction of hydrogen from diamond surfaces by a radical species attached to a mechanical positioning device for synthesis of atomically precise diamond-like structures .
Teaching the brain to be a brain is the process of triming the expressed patterns to what works for the functional organism .
After the Constitutional Conference , the next major process that greatly affected the fortunes of UPC and the country as a whole was the elections of 1962 .
4 A hashtag is a short message using words or phrases prefixed with the hash symbol # that allows Twitter followers to search topic areas or current events .
Creating a collection is an equally unrewarding affair .
A citron is a specific type , a lumpy surfaced one .
For example , a blush is a sign of individual unease called embarrassment , and a bear track in the woods is a sign that a bear has passed .
Langer felt that a sign was a stimulus that signals the presence of something else and that symbols are more complex .
A code is a set of correspondence rules used by a group or person .
It 's true they used to all sound like tractors and I 'd have to admit that you can still tell if a car 's a diesel from outside ( even a 320 cdi has a charcteristic ' rattle ' ) - but from inside you will only know it 's a diesel in 1st gear .
This may be offset by 220 cdi having a bit higher resale value but sometimes diesels are n't the economic solution you think ( 30,000 miles a year is another matter ) , this can also be more pronounced with 2nd hand buys .
If you want to trundle down the road at ease all the time , I suppose a diesel is the right choice ; my dad has a 220 cdi .
An example is the graph theory .
An example is the observation that people communicate and acquire information more quickly through pictures than through text because an entire image as treated as a " single unit " by the brain , thereby providing a high communication bandwidth when compared to words , which must be recognised one at a time [ 23 ] .
Within a quarter of a mile is the sweete spaw or Chalibiet , a Spring which rises off Iron and steele like Astrup or Tunbridge and Like the German Spaw .
A scrounger is a scrounger and merits no admiration .
If a man is a wealthy through the collection of economic rent by resource monopolisation , all he wants is to suppress labour to minimise the costs of his exploitation .
shipbuilder : " I did n't imply anything else " Actually you could be accused of implying that people who criticise this fellow are only doing so because they are jealous of him ( an attack is the best form of defence kind of tactic ) .
The courts have ruled that nomadism and living in a caravan is a reflection of Gypsies ' and Irish Travellers ' cultural heritage and not simply a lifestyle choice that can be ignored .
An airbrush is a great tool .
As you say , it may well be that a rheumatologist is the way to go .
An example is the name Fahad .
An example is the name Jamal as Egyptians or Sudanese would spell it as Gamal but would still pronounce it as Jamal .
Who you become as a person is the ultimate reward .
Getting a lounger was no problem .
Incision An incision is a cut made in the body with a surgical instrument during an operation .
Exploring the park on cross country skis or a snowmobile is another way to view animals , the geysers and other dramatic natural settings .
He barely graduated high school and being a mechanic is all he knows .
Thus , to the degree a person is a consistent reductionist , he or she is virtually dead , or worse , spiritually .
An exception is those who are on diuretics and flush water out of their already dehydrated bodies and yet produce colorless urine .
[A]bove I said that asking what defines a planet is a better question , but it 's still not the best .
If the central issue in such a case is the truth of the allegations , he added , " how the information was obtained and how well known the claimant [ is ] have no obvious relevance " .
The morphological structure of a lichen is a mass of fungal hyphae that forms around a small colony of algae cells .
Because a guy is an automobile executive does not make him inhuman .
A retainer is an agreement where you commit -- up front and in writing -- to pay the attorney for all of the legal work related to your case .
Because HPV can cause problems like genital warts and some kinds of cancer , a vaccine is an important step in preventing infection and protecting against the spread of HPV .
An example is the systematic manner in which Israel is harassed at international forums such as the United Nations , where the Arab states have for decades pursued a policy of isolating the Jewish state and turning it into a pariah .
" That is of course down to your own personal opinion , however penalising somebody for trying to protect their work from theft because they are proud of the time and effort they have put into a piece is a little unfair do n't you think ?
The fact that they do not drop many flowers or make a litter is another thing to be said for penstemons in arrangements .
Annotated Filmography of Charlie Chaplin September 17 , 2012 The holidays just are n't the same without old movies December 23 , 2010 All I need to make a comedy is a park , a policeman ...
A cookie is a text-only string of information that a website stores on your computer or device in the cookie file associated with the browser that you use to access the website .
A patent for an invention is the grant of property rights to the inventor by the government .
The answer , a person who is n't a terrorist is a person that worships Obama bin laden , worships government goons of all kinds , loves gay marriage , believes that cops do serve and protect , hates guns , and believes that gun free zones will stop crime .
I thought a terrorist was a person who acted violently toward others ?
OVERVIEW The peroxisome is one of several types of organelles present in almost all eukaryotic cells ( cells having a nucleus ) , both plant and animal , an organelle being a specialized structure within a cell where particular chemical and metabolic functions take place .
A peroxisome is a round or oval body with an average diameter of 0.5 micron .
A kinase is an enzyme that converts a protein into an enzyme .
The fluorescence lifetime ( τ ) of a fluorophore is the characteristic time that a molecule exists in the excited state prior to returning to the ground state .
But to me , a vision is a story told in goals , so I put it below the big story .
A book is a book is a book .
A boiler is an essential part of a home , providing you with hot water and heating .
But if having a car is a must , why not consider buying a less powerful , more fuel efficient car .
Requests for repetitions Senior : An excision is the removal of the cancer along with a healthy border of tissue around it .
Senior : An excision is the removal of the cancer along with a healthy border of tissue around it .
( trying to convey a unique location whose only tag is a common-noun is a frequent frustration in Amsterdam ) .
To them , war was a thing from a story , and a king was a creature of legend , who could do wonders without suffering pain .
Career Highlights : Recently qualifying as a solicitor was a major highlight and completing my first transaction was very satisfying .
Buying a house is a longterm financial commitment .
An aerofoil is a surface that adds lift when air moves over it .
But taking off at the start of a flight is a different situation ; this often requires trading speed for height even on modern craft .
A cookie is a small text file containing a unique identification number that is placed on the hard disk of your computer by a Web page server , enabling the Web server to identify your web browser and passively track its activities on that website .
A bard was no mere entertainer , but the keeper of his people 's history .
Oh to be eight again , when the assurance of a parent is a life-long certainty .
A beneficiary is the intended owner of the assets placed in the trust .
Well , a leader is a person who is very confident , a person who knows what they are doing , who knows how to influence people , who knows how to show people the way , who knows how to treat people - a leader would n't discriminate against anyone for instance , because that would n't be very fair .
" Rarely , rarely as comes the spirit of delight , there is the infrequent occasion which makes the reviewer 's life really worth while : such an occasion is the issue of this recording .
In the eyes of medicine , an addiction is a state in which the body relies on a certain substance in order to function , and accordingly develops a physical dependence , as in drug addiction .
· Support and sustain the community - the strength and character of a community can dramatically shape the associated technology and its success , an example being the role played by community in the development of object-oriented technology .
A requisition is an industry term for an invoice .
One of the most remarkable things one repeatedly encounters as an expat is the unfortunate American aversion to " foreign " ideas , particularly French ideas .
By definition a liberal is an obstacle to such change .
On Saturday night at the Detroit Jazz Festival in 2010 , a highlight was the set , " Hot Pepper " which featured Smulyan and Barry Harris .
but they do have golf carts for transportation ( and firefighting - a bright red golf cart with a pressurized water tank on the back and a siren is an odd sight ) so I 'm not sure that really counts .
( In the plant world , a sport is a genetic mutation . ) The height is 3 to 4 feet when in flower .
* [ A cultivar is a cultivated variety , an example being ' Golden Delicious ' apples .
A variety is a variation in a species of plant that occurs in nature .
Such a king is the very eye of mankind , the luminous ornament on the brow of creation , the fountainhead of blessings unto the whole world .
Smell after Pouring : This beer has a very good smell after pouring , it 's hits you a.s.a.p. and says drink me Poozer ( a poozer is a New Green Lantern recruit , or at least that 's what their drill sergeant Kilowog calls them but I digress ) .
It is acceptable to make use of the ANSI guarantee that a pointer to a structure is a pointer to its first member , and vice versa , but the fact that it is should be clearly marked in a comment just before the first member of the structure .
" Because those are the wishes that are really just a kid being a kid , and asking for something that they want to have fun .
" Well , technically she 's a chimera-it 's a long story .
Quickest thing to get you fired as a commander is a subordinate alleging sexual harassment .
Paul wrote , " Killing an American citizen without a trial is an extraordinary concept and deserves serious debate .
A fabliau is a brief tale , often little more than an anecdote , with a sharp sting at the end of it ; frequently it was in rime ; generally satiric in intent , it was full of frank gayety and of playful humor .
But to do so is to be ignored and to go uncounted , though Herman says : " A vote is a form of approval of the candidate as well as the process - nonvoting is a way of expressing disapproval of both , and as more and more people do refuse to vote the system as well as the candidates lose credibility .
Getting a degree is a personal goal for me , and I worry that an emphasis on job training would overshadow the value of learning .
an eternity is a looong time !
Adding a blog is an easy way to add fresh content consistently .
In response to your last point regarding brevity vs self-documentation , I would argue that communicating the full intent of an object is the most important thing .
A friar is a man in religious life who walks about from place to place preaching , while a monk remains sequestered in his monastery .
Working with a factory is a very unique experience .
Caches act on the same principles as an HTTP server because when you get down to brass tacks , a cache is a very specialized HTTP server , focused on mirroring content so it 's closer to the user .
Best regards , Robert PS : " A kiss is a lovely trick designed by nature to stop speech when words are superfluous .
Love this quote : " A kiss is a lovely trick designed by nature to stop speech when words are superfluous .
and then the quotation : A kiss is a lovely trick designed by nature to stop speech when words are superfluous .
A treat is a treat , regardless of size .
The first duty of a government is the security of the people and as the police and security services have said on so many occasions , we face a serious and continued security threat to our country , " he said .
Bob : " A glisko is a horse with a nib " .
Bob : " A nib is a plobb without a lock .
Bob : " A grommin is a two-sided yatter .
I suggest Bob 's last line be , " A grommin is a two-sided glisko .
" Making a sequel was the last thing we wanted to do , " explains Lee Unkrich , the director of TOY STORY 3 .
Morphing Land Of The Lost into a comedy was a genius decision that completely saved this .
A frago is a " fragmentary order " which summarises a complex requirement .
Maybe for his personal physical and mental health , but just because an alcoholic is a bartender does n't mean he 's preaching alcoholism or even potential alcoholism to the customers who come into the bar .
Running a business is an art .
A salad is a great way to start off a meal ; by adding a variety of healthy ingredients such as nuts , veggies , and whole grains , you can take the edge off your hunger until the main course is ready .
Mozart responded that a symphony was a complex and demanding form and it would be better to start with something simpler .
News that a crackpot minister at an incredibly tiny church in Florida may burn a Koran is a global story .
To contribute any eloquence to such an occasion is a great privilege .
One of the subtlest aspects of a film is the music .
A template is a fixed vision or idea of what you 're looking for in a partner .
Working at a desk is no excuse for all of the excessive " sitting " that is taking place .
Greene as a writer was a man of his time and his novels often centered on current events and recent history .
" A pope is a man whose ring is kissed and whose feet are tied .
In short , at the core of such a strategy is the attempt to channel the political energies of the exploited away from the conditions of their exploitation and into cultural spaces where they can be more easily managed and contained .
A war is a ' conflict-related reallocation of resources .
In today 's fast-paced , bite-sized world , a comment is an absolute gift .
How big of a deal is this , Dana , for Fred Thompson ?
A object is a object with a attribute , which is a string ; it can be created within the web application via a constructor , or is a reference to a byte sequence from a file from the underlying ( OS ) file system .
If a object is a reference to a byte sequence originating from a file on disk , then its snapshot state should be set to the state of the file on disk at the time the object is created .
A bit more inland but well-worth a visit are the towns of Grasse , famous for its perfumeries , and Biot , known for its glass blowers .
How is it determined whether a patient is a candidate for targeted therapy ?
Sometimes , a patient is a candidate for a targeted therapy only if he or she meets specific criteria ( for example , their cancer did not respond to other therapies , has spread , or is inoperable ) .
This is my position Any scientist whom is not a skeptic is a fanatic ...
Mountains of circumstantial evidence can be refuted , and to reject that as even a possibility is a better example of denial .
Because , according to the term definition an illustration is a visualization or a depiction made by an artist , such as a drawing , sketch , painting , photograph , or other kind of image of things seen , remembered or imagined , using a graphical representation .
" To find one actually inside a mummy is an enormous advance .
However , an egg hung up in a house is a lucky amulet , hence the ostrich eggs and cocoanuts resembling them which are so common in the East .
A sweepstakes is a great vehicle for collecting email addresses from existing or new fans .
Dating various portions of a sample is another kind of check that may be performed .
" We 've demonstrated that we can do 30 - day turnarounds , the challenge is to exercise it , " he said , an example being the back-to-back launches of the SES -8 and Thaicom -6 satellites 34 days apart , a span that included Christmas and New Year 's Day .
But a change of 6.5 minutes over a little more than a decade is a huge variation .
A seedbomb is a little ball made up of a combination of compost , clay and seeds .
Sensible seedbombing A seedbomb is a little ball of life and comes with a responsibility to choose your plants and be used in the correct way .
Though to remove such a thing is a travesty ; an injustice to the men , women and children who died during the Second World War !
An anagram is a word that is made by rearranging the letters of another word .
An anagram is a word or phrase that is made by rearranging the letters of another word or phrase .
The basic premise is : the only darn thing that can really validate an email is the receiving mailserver .
If an individual is a pacifist or conscientious objector , the Armed Forces is not for them .
$ 16,000 a year is a lot of money .
A garden is a place to be surrounded by beauty of scent , form , color and movement .
The day the grandad Delingpole apologists grasp that Gore was indeed always a fake is the day they might move on , stop fighting windmills and work for a gradual move towards UK energy independence .
A hangover is the wrath of grapes .
A will is a dead giveaway .
A plateau is a high form of flattery .
People buy from people they like and a blog is an excellent medium to let others get to know you in a more informal way .
Mathematically a catastrophe is a sudden discontinuity in an on first sight normal function .
Arguments from the world of generic functions and expected behaviour would probably argue for , because redefining a method is an action on a generic function , not an action on a set of application objects .
I guess what they could do is find some decrease in events with current decreasing temps ( prospectively ) , apply the law of desperate reciprocals and conclude a pear is an orange .
Land Patents ( Crown Land ) A patent was a confirmation of land ownership granted to a settler after he or she had fulfilled all obligations with respect to the land - clearing the land , putting up buildings , road work , etc. These are also available in the Archives of Ontario on microfilm and are indexed by surname ( 1795 -1825 ) or township ( 1826 -1850 ) .
The loss of a keyboard is a big deal and if the price is much higher than a solid netbook I have no idea why I would be attracted to an Apple Tablet .
Raising a baby is an exhilarating and fulfilling experience that surpasses the pains of carrying and giving birth to one .
I would say that I 'm an idealist , and anyone who 's not an idealist is a bad citizen .
Monckton seems to think such a threat is a magic bullet , no matter how often he fails to follow through .
Nothing tawdry , but since I 'm at a stuffy dinner party , these glimpses into the life of a sorta-stranger are an entertaining diversion .
But one or two hits a week is all you need .
A neurologist is a doctor with specialized training in diagnosing , treating and managing disorders of the brain and nervous system , such as Alzheimer 's disease , stroke , migraine , multiple sclerosis , brain injury , Parkinson 's disease and epilepsy .
When a mapping is both one-to-one and onto it is called a bijection .
A homeomorphism is a continuous transformation between two geometric figures that is continuous in both directions .
Or would a cookbook or a gift certificate for a massage be a better gift for a woman who is newly single , loves to cook but works at a community center .
A logarithm is an exponent .
Finding an antilog is the inverse operation of finding a log , so is another name for exponentiation .
If one really studies deeply what an ' environment ' is ( by this I mean more than simply saying that " it 's what things exist in " ) , one begins to understand that an environment is a construction process and not a medium ; nor is it a state or an entity .
Ordering the steps of a refactoring is a more subtle challenge than many programmers realize at first .
A doctor is a doctor no matter where they graduated from .
Truested Devices are usually in range and a fingerprint is no problem if the person sleeps , is drunk or the finger is simply forced to touch the reader .
The first symptom of an outbreak is an unpleasant tingling feeling in the skin .
Do n't assume that a smile is an indication of amusement or approval .
The project also speaks to the structure of digital technologies , from cash register receipts and LED signs to on-screen font display , showing that a typeface is a system of elements .
A typeface is the design of the letterforms ; a font is the delivery mechanism .
" If the sound was poor , they preferred it , " he laughs , " but , for me , an instrument was a tool , not a cult .
A neutrino is a sub-atomic particle that interacts weakly with matter and travels at a speed that is essentially the speed of light .
Unfortunately , I am yet again forced to apologize for my poiltical peers , race , and gender to all of you who realize a crime is a crime is a crime because of idiots on a webcomic comment section .
A fair price for a commodity is a price that accurately reflects the forces of supply and demand for the commodity , not the trading strategies of speculators who only are in the market to make a profit by the buying and selling of paper contracts with no intent to actually purchase , deliver , or transfer the commodity .
Being in a relationship is a sort of commitment to one another which means that you 're suddenly ' off-limits ' to everyone else .
He told doctors that the statement to a friend was an idle boast .
Half a mile is no distance when you consider the size of these turbines and the elevation they are at .
Split infinitives : An infinitive is the basic verb form ( to be , to do , etc. ) .
Not that being a police is all about shooting people , that would be stereotyping .
have u ever thought a stranger was some 1 u knew ?
If an AFD was the cause a red l.e.d would be illuminated on the detector itself .
A MCP is a simple switch between positive and negative which under normal condition is open circuit but when a glass is broke goes closed .
wabbit - Crticising a moderator 's a damn good start .
Renting a car is the most convenient means of getting from the airport to the city centre .
A mage is a high damage dealer ... he cannot use a shield and has no evasion ... his only task in a guild is to deal as much damage as possible .
Whether I link it up or just take a jump is an entirely new question .
" He then has to explain to the others : the back of a worm is a source of almost pure oxygen .
If your data is a hierarchy , a treemap is a good way to show all the values at once and keep the structure in the visual .
The speed of light in a vacuum is the maximum possible speed for travel through visible 3 D vector space .
But , to dismiss the use of all fear as a motivator is both dangerous and silly .
His Holiness the Dalai Lama said a salute is a prostration , from this point of view .
Take it literally - a blink is a single closing and reopening of the eye .
An affricate is a stop followed immediately by a fricative , and a nasal is made by letting some air out through the nose .
Would n't this mean a proton is a small black hole , or more accurately , a black hole is a large proton ?
Dear John , Eckard , and Steve A photon is a particle elementary of the Nature .
Gays are looked down upon as being too much like women to be men , and in this world , being a woman is a bad thing .
Question : How big or how decisive of a factor is this negative perception of Obama 's economic policy as far as the presidential election is concerned ?
If you see that a son is all heart , all love for his mother , really to make any sacrifice to please her , and resolved not to give her the least displeasure for all the gold in the world , I am sure that without any further inquiry or investigation you will conclude immediately that he is a rare and virtuous son .
An example was a reduction of fines against six Baptists from 50 times to five times the minimum monthly salary .
" A friend is a person with whom I may be sincere .
It also matters whether a country is a net importer or net exporter .
I was braced for unpleasantness , but I only find nice people helping a girl be a carnivore .
If he needs to drive a nail into a plank , using a hammer is the easiest way to do it .
To rephrase some of the dialogue slightly ... a hipster is a nobody .
They are the same thing really , a character is an 8 bit byte , whci can be represented in ASCII , hex , decimal or binary .
A spectrum is a source of information about what something is made of , its parts , and the Emotional I Ching gives us this access to the holistic , emotional , assessment made of some situation .
Check out Wikipedia whose definition you cite as one of your many references : A dichotomy is any splitting of a whole into exactly two non-overlapping parts .
One does NOT need ANY reference to ancient China to understand what is going on with the IC in that beneath the local context , Chinese instance , of recursion of a dichotomy is a universal level covering classes of meanings we all share as species members - and as such the IC becomes trainable as a universal .
Interesting idea , but the advantage to a forum is the diversity of opinions , which can lead to new conclusions .
Explain that a wreath is a symbol of the eternal circle of life .
Also if im amping comps ,6 x 9 s and a sub is this going to effect the battery ?
A conservative is a man with two perfectly good legs who , however , has never learned to walk forward .
Hi Luis , The Yi as a dictionary is an interesting concept .
" A PC is a wonderful way to keep in touch and can also make tasks such as letter writing , paying utility bills , shopping and managing a bank account so much easier , " she said .
Whenever a feeling is voiced with truth and frankness , whenever a deed is the clear expression of sentiment , a mysterious and far reaching influence is exerted .
Axiom [ disambiguation ] An axiom is a self-evident proposition in mathematics and epistemology .
In other words , an axiom is a logical statement that is assumed to be true .
It is not because he is a leader of industry that a man is a capitalist ; on the contrary , he is a leader of industry because he is a capitalist .
( 31 ) A hyperlink is a cross-reference ( in a distinctive font or color ) appearing on one web page that , when activated by the point-and-click of a mouse , brings onto the computer screen another web page .
" Such a situation is both sad and ironic , because rarely have the radical edges of black and white music come closer to overlapping .
Talking Heads ' most radical attempt at an answer was the use of dadaist Hugo Ball 's nonsense words as a mock-African chant in " I Zimbra .
I need a sponsor is all you have to say at a meeting .
An average human score in a trait is a 6 -9 , while max is 30 -39 , and cosmic is 150 -999 .
It is well-settled that in determining whether a transaction is a sale , a lease , or a license , courts look to the economic realities of the exchange .
" A clear understanding of how to use a tool is the first step , combined with some easy-to-follow processes for where to put things , " said Pearce .
To be cold was a misery , to be warmed by a fire was a sharp agony because the chilblains stung and stabbed when the numbing cold was gone .
KARAS : 6 Q Good morning 7 A Good morning 8 Q Can you tell us how you are employed 9 A I am a special agent with the Federal Bureau of 10 Investigation 11 Q Is that here in New York City ?
1112 1 A Yes , I did 2 Q And how long , how long a drive was this from the Miram 3 Shah place to guest house to the Farouq camp ?
23 A. That is correct 24 Q. Could you please describe to the jury generally what an 25 embassy like the one in Kenya is and what it does 1852 1 A. An embassy is the official presence of one government , in 2 this case the United States , in a foreign country , Kenya , 3 accredited to the government of Kenya to represent US 4 interests .
17 A. That is the front of the building , and the area of the 18 building of which you only see a portion is the back 19 Q. Could we now publish Government 's Exhibit 803 B. 20 What is in Government 's Exhibit 803 B , Ambassador ?
A topic is a general area of inquiry ; derived from the Greek topos ( place ) , " topic " designates the general subject of your essay .
A thesis is an idea , stated as an assertion , which represents a reasoned response to a question at issue and which will serve as the central idea of a unified composition .
An anchor is a marker inserted at a specific section of a page .
Worth a snoop are both Kasra ( 99 Highgate Road ) and Seneh Carpets ( 90 Highgate Road ) , but our favourite is the excellent The Orientalist , a vast three-room mini-empire which they claim is the largest handmade supplier in Europe , piled up with rugs and carpets of all sizes and ages .
A golfer is a golfer whether it 's President Ford or Alice Cooper .
Thompson was educated in Detroit , Michigan , and from there entered the Union army , in the quarter master 's department ; was with Sherman until he left Chattanooga , arid for a time was a clerk on one of the river steamers .
Hegwood says , " Writing a novel is an exercise in self discipline and persistence .
Just had a thought this morning that being a dancer is another identity that someone may have in terms of their fitness .
' I 've said that a biographer is a licensed fanatic , and that seems to be true .
The denotation , or extension , of a term is the list of a class of objects referred to by the word ( think of it as " how far does this word extend ? " ) .
The connotation , or intension , of a word is the list of attributes shared by all members of the class named by the word ( think of it as " by using this word , what do I intend ? " ) .
One of the things that sometimes frustrates me as an actor is the lack of control over the final product .
A plant is a pretty basic organism , it needs light , water , CO 2 and a few soil nutrients to survive .
An enzyme is a protein produced in a cell and aids a specific chemical reaction to take place .
( 2 ) Ticket as Receipt : Except as provided in section ( 4 ) of this rule , a ticket is the only valid receipt for claiming a prize .
As to buying up the debt , the term shall was not inconsistent with it , if provision be first made for paying the interest : if not , such an expedient was a mere evasion .
One film that I liked a lot was a Western and it had this shot of a train approaching the camera .
A muffin is a convenient way to start the day .
Especially when one considers that driving a car is a privelage , not a fundamental natural right , and more lives are lost annually to automobile accidents than firearms .
Running * with * a person is a skill I 've never really mastered !
A compass was all but useless .
Turning a television show into a religion was an oddity , to say the least , when Star Trek fans first did so back in the 70 s .
An internship is a supervised work experience at a pre-approved agency that relates to your specific field of study .
Intuition is equated with abstraction on the basis that : " an intuition is an insight into necessary connections between two simple ideas or elements of an idea .
A lesson is an intermediate link in the chain of a play 's preparation .
The architecture of a processor is the choices that have been made for its machine operations , how they have been oraganized and implemented , and how it interacts with main memory and other components .
Organizing a float is a tremendously time consuming , complex , and difficult task .
The burial of servants with a ruler was a consistent practice in the tombs of the early first dynasty pharaohs .
A tour is the perfect opportunity to catch up on all the reading that did n't get done while you were working furiously against your last deadline .
Another 75 tests sought to determine whether an individual was a " carrier " of a disease , and 9 tests were used to predict the likelihood that an individual with a family history of a given eye disease would go on to develop it .
While an analogy is a useful means of explanation , it does not constitute proof .
An expression is a combination of literals , operators , variables , and parentheses used to calculate a value .
Now , I used to think a hammer is a hammer , just need a big heavy head of steel harder than what your forging .
The path name of a file is a chain of directory names followed by a file name .
Expansion slots in a computer are a connection on the motherboard that additional cards such as video or graphic adapters can be plugged into .
I have taught my own class twice and , for me , being able to stand up in front of an audience was a major accomplishment .
( And how worthy a thing is this , that , under the auspices of faith , men should congregate from all quarters to Christ !
A hurricane is a type of tropical cyclone .
Subject : Feminist child-raising From : Helene To : All Date Posted : Fri , Jul 02 , 1999 at 09:51:1 3 ( EDT ) Email Address : emailblank Message : Laurie wrote : To me , a feminist is a humanist , someone who believes women have the right to follow their dreams , whether they are traditionally female or traditionally male .
I would have made that instead : To me , a feminist is a humanist , someone who believes women and men have the right to follow their dreams , whether they are traditionally female or traditionally male .
To determine whether an entity is an " operator " with respect to information collected at a site , the FTC will consider who owns and controls the information ; who pays for the collection and maintenance of the information ; what the pre - existing contractual relationships are in connection with the information ; and what role the Web site plays in collecting or maintaining the information .
There is a joke that says that a cult is a small , unpopular religion that has no political clout .
[ 19 ] One very good online community for constructive commentary on a tale is the Ex-Guards mailing list ( to join , send an e-mail to ex-Guards - emailblank ) .
Outsmarting an employer is another option .
A cartouche is an oval frame that encloses a name .
An antibody is a protein your body produces to fight harmful substances .
A lampoon is a short satire or segment of a literary work that burlesques a particular person , usually caricaturing the victim 's physical appearance and other distinguishing characteristics .
The mission to establish this dynamic in a studio was a long one , though .
A noun is the name of a person , place , thing , or idea .
Pronoun A pronoun is a word used in place of a noun .
A verb is a word that expresses an action or a state of being .
A preposition is a word ( or group of words ) that shows the relationship between its object ( a noun or a pronoun that follows the preposition ) and another word in the sentence .
An interjection is a word or group of words that expresses strong emotion or surprise .
A clause is a group of words that contains both a subject and a verb .
A phrase is a group of related words that works together as a single part of speech .
Since a participle is a verb that can function as an adjective e.g. , melting snow ) , a participial phrase is one that consists of a participle and its modifiers and complements .
A genre is a particular type of literature , a literary form .
A genre is a form like a novel , tragedy , comedy , epic , or sonnet .
( An example is the ubiquitous confirmation box .
A sidekick is an inferior or junior hero .
A database is an organized collection of data .
A descendant of a class is a child of that class , or a child of a child of that class , and so on .
A librarian is a mediator between man and the graphic records that his previous generations have produced ; and the goal of the librarian is to maximise the social utility of these records for the benefit of humanity ( Shara , 1972 ) .
A portal is a centralized point for accessing applications , information , and other resources in your enterprise or on the Internet .
One of the main features of a portal is the ability to change the layout or content according to your needs .
I always liked George Sheehan 's view on Runner vs. Jogger : The difference between a runner and a jogger is an entry slip .
The hours I have spent discussing the value of that man snoring in the background of a Guided by Voices song or the times at a bar I 've spent identifying flavors in a beer are some of the best memories I own ( aside from those involving my partner and daughter , of course ) .
In any case , the only operation you can perform on a marker interface is to ask whether an object is an instance of it , a function which can now be performed better with annotations .
A quaternion is an example of a special type of 4 - dimensional vector .
Focusing on making an impact is an attempt to engineer a particular response from people - and that is already in the realm of manipulation .
Could a president be a lame duck for 3 years ?
DALHOUS : Visibility Is a Trap 12 " ( BLACKEST 029 EP ) 15.50 Visibility Is a Trap is the new EP by Dalhous , comprised of four originals together with a masterfully understated Regis remix .
The most important part in the success of a project is the project managers experience and knowledge in the project management a ...
A stock is a thing , like a matel toy it can not be another certificate of currency as this right is reserved by the house of congress .
In all of them , competing in a raked poker game for any stakes outside of a casino is a crime .
The boiling point of a liquid is the temperature at which the vapour pressure of the liquid equals the atmospheric pressure .
There 's also a related property called HasUnboundGenericParameters which will tell you if a type is an open or closed generic .
A schema is a description of the legitimate contents of a message .
In summary , a type is a closed encapsulation of state + behavior .
A schema is a potentially open description of state , while a contract is a description of the messaging patterns that define service behaviors .
Actually the person having a go is a fairy-cake specialist ( I 'm not joking ) - you know , those tiny little stupidly overpriced things that are basically just sugar that have had flour waved in their general direction .
An alloy is a mixture of metals , although occasionally may include non-metals .
A PDF is a means for itemizing the relevant I / O specifications , libraries and so forth needed to pass parameters and execute programs on a particular grid element .
A cline is a gradual change in gene frequency in a population .
A race is a separate breeding population within a species .
What was more of a shame was the lack of the promised follow-up .
An ally is an associate who provides assistance and often , friendship .
Mounting a telescope is a child 's play for the 18 - year-olds who made India proud at the Astronomy Olympiad held in Rio De Janeiro in 2012 .
An archive is a collection of bits and pieces ; traces that remain from the past .
A stimulus is a change in the environment .
A receptor is a specialised cell that detects a stimulus .
Like every other deal that they make , offering a book deal to a website is a gamble .
mac with the gratuitous and very safe difference of to be as well as the text messages to mobile for remember an appointment is an excellent application .
A mutagen is a natural or human-made agent ( physical or chemical ) which can alter the structure or sequence of DNA .
Yet , can learn by a oral climax that a pentagon is a man in black figure with five sides , but a politician does not learn in this way the meaning of everyday words such as ' facilatator ' , ' leader ' , ' perpetrator ' , or ' traitor ' .
We may begin with the most remarkable item of the three , the teaching about the origin of the British Empire for why should a country be a crusading element of killing machines ?
" Prole inner city existance is " decadent " in that an utterance is a performance with an internal organisation such as neighbourhood watch , with structure and coherence .
The activation energy of a reaction is a constant for that specific reaction - it can only be changed if the mechanism of the reaction itself changes .
I consider Gmail a service just like how a Bus is a service that can transport me from one side of the city to another .
An avatar is an expression of the direct self of the player online ( pp 172 - 174 ) , with real selves emerging only under situations of deep pressure and duress .
Along with the good news that our economy is starting to see a recovery was a caution from the council that we are not out of the woods yet .
A stingray is a fake cell phone tower that law enforcement can configure to temporarily replace ...
For me a challenge is all part of the fun .
There are possibly other options than a PICAXE to filter noise from the RF but a PICAXE is a solution easier and better than others .
Much could be learnt from the arduino world , a forum is a great place to discuss things , it 's far from ideal for documentation or how to 's .
First , and most importantly , a grant is a gift .
For couples expecting their first child , having a baby is the most significant thing in the world !
More basically do you think remorgaging my house to fund a blt is a good idea ?
A buggy is a light pushchair , small , narrow and lightweight .
This prefix ' Cu ' which signifies a hound was a very common one to early Gaedhelic names ' .
Skiing is one of the worst ; the swishing of the skis , the crowd yelling and the cow bells are all drowned out by the commentator stating that a competitor was a bit off course and not up to his usual standard .
Setting up a business is a nightmare in France because of all the reasons mentioned above ( red tape , etc. .. ) Some of my friends who have tried have unfortunately failed or delayed because of it and are amazed that it took me less time , cost and paperwork to get up and running .
The device , called the " driver handheld computing device lock-out " in U.S. Patent and Trademark Office publications , would reportedly shut off the mobile device functions that could distract a driver if the device detected that a driver was both driving and using the device .
Wearing a helmet is the first step , but experts agree that more can be done .
It 's always better to use proper XML facilities when you can , but you never know when a hack is the only way to go .
What is the position of the Department of Justice on the question whether a fetus is a person within the meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment ?
Justice Scalia : We did not say in Roe that a State could not have a position on whether a fetus is a person , did we ?
Justice Scalia : We said that the Constitution takes no position on whether a fetus is a person , and / or that it does take a position that a fetus is not protected by the Constitution .
Justice Scalia : Including State regulation on the basis of the people 's determination within that State that a fetus is a person .
An appraisal is an opinion of value or the act or process of estimating value .
Know A zoo is a prison for animals who are guilty of nothing except being animals .
A station is a covert facility , widely held to be housed in US embassies and connoting a sizable and continuing CIA presence condoned by the host country .
Not that a drill is the real thing .
And baseball combines all of them , with NCAA limits on counters , equivalencies , roster size , and minimum scholarship amounts , plus how MLB 's liberal draft policies create uncertainty once a player is a junior .
As Dorothy becomes a big star , Michael discovers that being a woman is a lot more difficult than he thought , especially when he falls for his co-star ( Jessica Lange ) while her father ( Charles Durning ) falls for Dorothy .
A type is the combination of the four preferences .
Such a thing is an actual rarity in a real scrapbook .
When Senator John Kerry voted against it , he cited concerns about its interaction with abortion rights , stating , " the law ... provide[s] that a fetus is a human being .
However it goes about it , a legislature is the only body that can resolve the questions implicated in embryo adoption .
Making a full-width keyboard fold into the dimensions of an iPad was an engineering feat , and Logitech did it perfectly .
A pluton is a relatively small intrusive body ( a few to tens of km across ) that seems to represent one fossilized magma chamber .
The caterpillar itself may change color , especially as it approaches pupation in its last / fifth instar , ( an instar is the eating stage between two molting stages ; PSs tend to spend four or five days in each instar ) .
Super trooper makes a good point - for many , ( including myself ) owning a home is a lifestyle choice , not an investment .
For him such a statement was a matter of timing , which is the rightful province of a brilliant political leader in charge of a government during a time of war .
A portion is the amount of food that you choose to eat for a meal or snack .
A wedding is an excellent time to bring family and friends together to celebrate .
Perhaps a brunch is the proper excuse !
Your default text notification on a Droid is the Droid system noise .
A podcast is a recording of a performance .
The idea that a church was a sacred place , in which after divine service was over , no business was to be transacted , is not older than the movement which Laud instigated .
A creeing-trough is a stone mortar in which grain was creed [ or shelled ] until the husks came off .
Hi Howard sounds to me like a drogue is a multipurpose good idea from what you have said !
Since the end product of a compromise is a solution that does not fully meet everyone 's requirements , compromising requires greater flexibility than other orientations .
When using chitosan to lower cholesterol 1000 to 2000 milligrams twice a day is a typical dosage .
BOOT AND SHOE MANUFACTURE : Shoe making as an industry was a relative latecomer not only to CHARNWOOD but to the whole country .
Using a shredder is an easy way to make a criminal 's life harder , but for a low-tech solution you could rip up documents after defacing all personal information , or just burn them .
I 'm on weightwatchers at the mo & a tin of Heinz is 4.5 points & branston is 5.5 points ... not sure if the tomato sauce is richer or not ... on WW a point is a point ... maybe heinz wins again ?
A visitation is an opportunity for a community to take stock .
A joke is a reminder of the fact that any of such outputs entails the use of a degree of creativity , whatever felicitously or not , from the point of view of the grammatical accuracy and of the communicative effectiveness .
The search for a solution is a process which is carried out at a conscious level .
' Long hours and even longer days on a shoot were the norm , ' she recalls .
The net foreign asset position of a country is an essential component in the investment decision .
A church is a place of worship , which means that when planning decorations for your wedding you need to be mindful of this .
A bit of common sense will probably tell you this , but it 's always good to check and if they say no , then do n't get upset , after all a church is a place of worship .
I mean it 's cool to observe how popular websites are doing things , and we can assume that they must be doing something right , but just because a method is the most popular does n't mean it is the most successful .
Also , knowing that David Diamond kept a diary was an incentive .
1 ) Any symptom that you have after eating a food is a food allergy .
If you 've got COPD , quitting smoking is n't an option-it 's a requirement .
Within Twilio , an application is a set of URLs and other configuration data for handling voice calls and SMS .
Closing a school is a local decision made by a school or district in connection with the local health department , said Curtis Allen , a spokesman for the Atlanta-based CDC .
NO safety worth a second is a bold statement as I know some will go there for sure .
" A distraction is an alert says , ' Orient your attention here now ; this could be dangerous .
There is an old-timey and , to my mind , very sound belief that an artist is a instrument for the muses , a kind of windmill converting the ether of existence into electricity which can then be used by the whole town .
Vitamin A deficiency is the leading cause of treatable blindness in the world .
" The best type of workout to do repeatedly throughout a season is a race !
Recall that the hypothesis that a mechanism with a function is a spandrel implies that the mechanism was a by-product , and supporting a by-product hypothesis generally requires specifying the adaptation responsible for producing the by-product ( Tooby & Cosmides , 1992 ) .
The key issue is not whether a hypothesis is a story or not-at some level , all scientific hypotheses can be viewed as stories .
If it was n't for Andersen and Jenkins 's narrative , I would 've never known how lucky and spoiled I was to grow up in a place were all ages shows are routine and where free benefits for important local causes are a rite of punk passage .
I learned in Kindergarten that a friend is a friend is a friend .
Yes the smartest thing I ever learned is a friend is a friend is a friend .
For I learned in Kindergarten that a friend is a friend is a friend .
Yes , I learned in Kindergarten that a friend is a friend is a friend .
All of that presumes , however , that a user is an active one .
Noting whether an error is a compile time error or a runtime error can help you in finding the problem .
If a matrix is a row or column vector , you can use just one subscript .
As you 've seen , calling a function is a matter of typing the function name and then giving a list of arguments in parentheses .
A pointer is a variable which contains the memory address of another variable or matrix .
Even a dictionary is no match for our Messiah .
Basically , a blog is a hi-tech version of those little diaries they used to sell in the five - & - dime , the kind that had little locks on them , and that girls , in particular , used to confide in .
To ride on an ass was a position of prestige ( Judges 10.4 ) , and a white ass was seen as even more prestigious , the ride of princes .
A biopsy is a procedure to remove a sample of tissue from the prostate .
A network is all boundary without inside and outside .
A network is a positive notion which does not need negativity to be understood .
An actor-network is an entity that does the tracing and the inscribing .
I 've always been a tad sceptical about women who say being a mother is the hardest job in the world .
Anselin was appalled and upset by the poverty he saw in a country where losing a match was the signal for fans to riot .
Usually , twenty supervised operative cases as a guide are the minimum required to reach this level , but this can be less as long as trainer recommendation has been provided that the required standard of competency has been achieved .
ii ) Is the question whether an individual is a child for the purposes of section 17 and 20 of the Children Act 1989 one of precedent fact , which the court may review on the balance of probabilities ?
If it is , then whether it was breached is adjourned to the final hearing " ; ii ) the issue of whether an individual is a child for the purposes of section 17 and 20 of the Children Act 1989 is not one of precedent fact ; and iii ) in the case of M , Lambeth 's departure from the decisions of the AIT and Secretary of State was lawful .
" For the purposes of assessing whether a child is a child , is paediatric evidence of the sort produced by Dr .
There should be no predisposition , divorced from the information and evidence available to the local authority , to assume that an applicant is an adult , or conversely that he is a child .
It must itself decide whether an applicant is a child in need : i.e. whether the applicant is a child , and if so whether he or she is in need within the meaning of Part III of the Children Act 1989 .
Straker 's ( and Mr Wise 's ) submissions on the proper construction of section 20 is that a local authority is under an absolute duty , having determined that a person is a child in need in its area , to provide that person with accommodation .
In construing the relevant statutory provision Lord Scarman rejected the notion that a gloss could be put on the words " where a person is an illegal immigrant " so that there should be read in the words " where the immigration officer has reasonable grounds for believing a person to be an illegal immigrant " - see page 108 E and pages 109 et seq .
What Marishal Thompson consider the special relevance of the fact the trees are owned by a council to be is not explained ; perhaps the implication is that a council is a rich institution it is worth making a legal claim against ?.
There is so much to say , so much to tell you -- but one step at a time is the byword here !
Personally I think the idea of taking out a gaurantee is a waste of your money .
A comet is a clump of frozen gases mixed with dust .
A diploma from a Bible college or the wearing of a dog-collar is no guarantee of the Lord 's calling or approval , anymore than a church building is a guarantee that it houses the Body of Christ on a Sunday morning .
For instance , the sixth note of C major is A , and A minor is the relative minor key .
The body and sound hole of a guitar is a Helmholtz resonator ; the effect is to boost the loudness of the lower frequencies , usually the bottom octave .
A sale is a sale , and expenses are expenses .
We find numerous challenges in the Qur ' an to produce chapters , and even events similar to its own from any other source , and if indeed a book is a copy of anything else , then the author would never claim that what he has brought forth is unique and will never challenge anyone to bring its similarity , because such would fail him instantly .
Thus , a world-view is the most practical and current activity of social imagery , present or disseminated in all of our essential everyday collective practices .
All you can really expect from an athelete is a win against the best in the World .
A strategic agent attacking a food-owner is a cheater .
A location is a cell in the grid .
A zoologist is a legitimate title , as is geologist , biologist , etc. Cryptozoologist means nothing .
On the one hand , the ability to speak and write is best developed by imitating and adapting material which has first been heard or read ; on the other , active use of a language is an excellent means of consolidating knowledge .
" A bank is a place where they lend you an umbrella in fair weather and ask for it back again when it begins to rain .
The usual suspects , mainly white middle-class feminists , debated how much ( if any ) of a slut is a good thing .
The total magnetic flux , , in volt-seconds , threading an area is the flux density integrated over the area .
( 3 ) An important consideration is that to impose a restriction is a statutory intrusion into the right of a party to bring proceedings before the court and to be heard in matters affecting his / her child .
The more you ignore those dreams , the more your unconscious turns up the volume - so a nightmare is that message on full volume , " Ellis says .
A lavatory is a place you go to for a fundamental need .
An alternative is the " critical realism " suggested by Middleton & Walsh , and by Tom Wright .
In particular , consumers have complained to us that " cash " as a description of a fund is a word they understand as meaning a safe deposit for funds , with no risk to capital .
I am infact surprised that the candidates feel that regularly contributing lengthy posts to a blog is a useful way to spend the final week of the campaign .
A podcast is a series of digital media files , usually either digital audio or video , that is made available for download via web syndication .
Outlining a programme is another matter .
For the vast majority of us , such an exercise is a little like putting ' go faster ' stripes ' on a Ford KA .
Nature is neither cruel , nor moralistic , and if you live close to it , the concept of good and evil merges into one , so that the death of an intruder is either something for the pot , or the defence of territory .
While the popular imagination will typically worry about having to receive a huge range of injections before a tropical holiday , such a scenario is an unhelpful myth .
A milium is a small , raised bump on the skin .
For those who are n't in the know , a zine is a self-published magazine , and over 1400 people have contributed so far .
I personally think a scheme to reapply every 5 years for a fee is the best solution .
I live in a rural area , which means a car is a necessity .
The preparatory period to building a party is the period of argument between small groups to clarify positions , and this is the stage we are at .
CHRIS EVANS : A third of those asked agreed : Buying a bridge is an opportunity not to be missed .
A budget is a wonderful thing but sometimes you have to break it ...
Ah ... well ... since you 've already got the chassis , finding a shell is the next step .
I mean the men who the world seems to find attractive do nothing for me , can take them or leave them , in fact arrogance in a man is a real turn off for me so if a guy knows that he is attractive then that makes him very unnattractive if you see what I mean .
A geometry is a must for all cars regardless of whether the chassis is fully adjustable or not , i.e. toe , camber and castor .
The object I had mistaken for a ball was the handle on the end of a very long retractable lead .
An opinion is a subjective statement or thought about an issue or topic , and is the result of emotion or interpretation of facts .
A kickbike is a cross between a bike and a scooter , so your joints have far less concussion than running - great if you 're coming back from injury .
A double-mindedness is no bad thing , I say , at worst a minor sin .
v 1 A double-mindedness is no bad thing , I say , at worst a minor sin .
I 'm constantly telling myself that a mind is a tragic thing to lose .
If the vast majority of web entries was before the postal entries where even received , then yes IMO a ballet is the only fair way forward .
" Katie Bond , publicity director at Bloomsbury , is more pragmatic , saying : " At the most basic level , when a book is a runaway success , people are very aware of the subject and publishers are looking for the next book that might take off in that way .
Such a suggestion is a gross distortion of reality , not to say a slur on the hard work and commitment exhibited by Commissioners and staff alike over the course of the last four years .
A pdf on an iPad is a beautiful thing but does not compare with the tactile pleasure or sitting with a book and feeling the pages - it is so much more engaging to the senses .
" Kempton " In fact Grimsby as a town is a better place than the likes of Truro or Wells which are cities .
In fact Grimsby as a town is a better place than the likes of Truro or Wells which are cities .
For most small businesses in the UK a loan is the obvious choice , but deciding what form this should take can be confusing .
A grant is a sum of money given to a business for a specific project .
( 2 ) For the purposes of subsection ( 1 ) ( c ) a company is a wholly-owned subsidiary of a bank or building society ( " the parent " ) if it has no members except -
The fact that you have the privilege of a vote is the result of a philosophical and religious decision about what a human is , and what human " rights " are .
If however a politician was a Creationist or a Biblical Literalist then I would actively vote against him / her at the expense of all other policies , simply because I could n't trust the intelligence of a politician with such views and would thus have no confidence in their ability to act as an MP .
How can a bishop be a Lord .
If you do find the perfect venue , but it 's not quite big enough , or you 've decided to hold the reception at your home or outdoors , a marquee is an option worth considering .
Edith Morgan , registration services manager in Swansea , said : " Registering a death is a difficult and sometimes traumatic occasion for those who have just lost a loved one .
( 4 ) For the purposes of this section an amount is an avoidance arrangement amount if it arises in consequence of , or otherwise in connection with , arrangements of which the purpose , or one of the main purposes , is securing a tax advantage for any person .
A Concept is an Anglo-Japanese advertising agency with diverse experiences in both the British and Japanese markets .
( 1 ) References in section 418 to a company being a party to a loan relationship as debtor or creditor include a company which indirectly stands in the position of a debtor or creditor as respects the loan relationship by reference to a series of loan relationships or relevant money debts .
Remember , a career is a long term plan .
But if a woman is a bit of a power freak and determined to put you down , and if you 're not bright enough to do it with words , it can happen .
The amendment to the law also states that any attempt to undertake such a transaction is a criminal offence and could result in a prison sentence of up to 5 years .
A showgirl is a dancer or performer in a stage entertainment show .
When the car was 1st delivered from the garage from new there was a knock from the back which Mercedes kindly put two new replacement shocks on and been ok since , so before I take it back as still under warranty and do n't want to look a fool is this normal or what ?
I have to be honest and say that i dont care whether a dog is a x or a pedigree - the one thing i dont hugely like is some of the mad names given to x 's ' Chorkies ' and ' Jugs ' and ' Malti-poos ' - people get really huffed when i fill out their details and write in ' cross 1 / cross 2 ' etc depending on the pups size - they say ' but my dog is a breed ...
Just the same way as a cockapoo is a cocker spaniel cross poodle .
A dog is a dog .
LEAVING a legacy is a difficult thing to judge .
Lastly , how big an issue is this ?
Suggesting an area is a ' ghetto ' because there are more ' ethnics ' than white people , suggesting a mosque makes an area a ghetto , am I the only one here that finds this sort of nonsense offensive ?
But 2 people having an argument is an everyday occurance , not an incident .
Btw a litre is the same as a cubic decimeter , 1 dm = 10 cm , so just measure the tank in dm to start with ...
The point made is a processor is a processor is a processor regardless of religion .
All I really need to make a living is an Internet connection .
Eva having a bath is a plaver , my eldest son who she trusts has to come and lift her in , talk to her , keep her in the bath and I wash and rinse her as fast as possible , she really is n't happy the whole time , we only do this as infequentle as possible .
I apologise for not getting back to you - an Invoice is an invitation to pay , but must be cancelled via a creidt note at their end , therefore they can do that and the transaction never took place - i , e .
( 5 B ) A patient is a qualifying patient if he is treated by virtue of section 80 D ( 3 ) , 82 A ( 2 ) or 85 A ( 2 ) below as if he had been conditionally discharged and were subject to a hospital order and a restriction order , or to a hospital direction and a limitation direction , or to a transfer direction and a restriction direction .
For example each button on a form is an instance of the button object class .
Therefore I propose that when a person is a prospective parent they should have to pass a fit and proper persons test .
" People say a pub is the heart of a village .
The attempt to sell off part of Graves Park is a classic example : But an attempt is all it was , soon foiled by local councillors and local people power !
But an attempt is all it was , soon foiled by local councillors and local people power !...
The idea of each MP being directly elected and representing a constituency is a good one , and should n't be abandoned hastily .
A plus was the fine conversation at breakfast with other guests .
If career change is your goal , a project is an ideal way of gaining exposure to a new sector .
The place for a pod is the bin and nows the time to put it in it .
Its not a fashion issue i 'm making here , its one of practicality and the fact you seem to be having a spot of bother understanding that maybe suggests why you also think a pod is the right tool for the job .
oh and btw with a spider pod you can point 3 rods in different directions as for pods used by noddies-are you say steve reynard who was in a carp mag this week using a pod is a noddy ?
A referrendum is a must .
A refferendom is a very noble idea if ( and indeed if ) all the councils in the area agree to abide by the decision .
A laptop is a great way to go , mine sits on the floor at the side of the desk and has a 23 " monitor and full keyboard plugged in , then a firewire cable to a chain of external drives .
A nation is the unity of a people .
But invariably , a treadmill is a better option than complicated cardiovascular exercises that are unnecessarily stressful .
That , in a nutshell is the crux of the problem .
It will not , therefore , be wondered at that , however great may be the excesses of pitmen , a religion is a very important and essential feature in the constitution of their social economy .
Trying to do all that on one op-amp and an ADC will be quite a challenge :) An op-amp is an op-amp and amplifies analogue , but op-amps can also be congured as comparators ... analogue / digital ... ooeerr .
Surely the heat output of a processor is a function of the power input ?
A battleship is an object which requires not merely control over the economy but the ability to project logistical force around the world in the form of coaling stations and bases .
In the beginning a patriot is a scarce man , hated and feared , but in time when his cause succeeds , the timid join him , because then it costs nothing to be a patriot .
Matching up with other drivers and sharing the empty seats in a car is a brilliant way of reducing your carbon footprint as well as your fuel costs .
hey guys * * * think * * * decided i want to be a royal marines officer but i dont want to go to collage or 6th form i just seems to long is it possible to go from school straight to a rm officer if its not im just * * * go to be a commando is this wise ?
Bill , A nuc is the better option for a new starter , IMO .
If you want to ' design ' then a degree is a minimum and most will require experience and proven track record .
A recent review said that a room with a view was a waste on money because the windows were very small and were very dirty .
A foreclosure is the actual process of the company coming and taking the home to sell it to repay the debt that is still owed .
The race of a patient is a real factor in how likely they are to match with a donor ...
What fetched everything to a head was a guy i had met(married) who wanted me to leave my wife and live with him .
Guys there is a solution being a Fragile diabetic means that I share many of the problems you have described , my consultant has tried all the obvious solutions .
I think this time of the year a boat is THE answer to locating and catching the fish .
Think you 're spot on about a boat being the way forward !
Have you ever wondered how criminals are identified using their DNA , or how DNA paternity tests can prove whether a man is the father of a baby ?
Technically a franchise is a licence granted to an individual or firm to run a business in as assigned territory using another firm 's proven brand and systems .
Specific to a franchise are the Initial Franchise Fee which is paid on completion of the signing formalities and thereafter a monthly management service fee or royalty paid as a percentage of gross revenues earned .
A geode is a beautiful mineral formation that usually consists of an exterior shell of chalcedony ( very fine-grained quartz ) , with other minerals and / or crystals lining the interior .
It can be difficult to tell if a rock is a geode or not without craking it open to view the inside - which is why so many people find this an interesting and exciting hobby .
So a hyperloop is a subsection of an isolation and also a subsection of a thru wrap whereas an airwrap is only a subsection of a thru wrap .
If Kagame or any other African leader ever figures out a way how we can overcome the dangerous mindsets prevalent on this continent he will without a doubt be the greatest leader Africa has ever known .
Many people do not own a bread box and building one for a kitchen is a unique concept .
A ticket is a revocable license .
$ 5 a cup is a bargain when you consider the prices some places were selling Esmeralda Special per press , or ( yikes ! ) JBM for prices upwards of 10 USD .
An objective is a matter of choice based upon the needs of the business or its proprietors .
Yes , a camel is a horse made by a committee and it will never win the Triple-crown .
The habitual behavior of people on a channel is the most powerful influence on newbies arriving on the channel .
How many hours a day is this work ?
A cookie is a small file of information that the site can access again later on .
In soil sampling , a problem is the representativeness of samples .
The cation exchange capacity of a sample is the total number of cations it can retain on its adsorbent complex at a given pH .
A bequest is a current gift that is taken from future dollars but can still leave a legacy for both your family and Fleming College .
Being an Arvanite is a complete non-issue in Greece .
This is a common device that by no means is a slight on its own - it 's a legitimate way of having a character be a blank slate , as it were , and form all their relationships with characters they meet at the same time as the reader .
The official NBER definition of recession ( which is used to date U.S. recessions ) is : A recession is a significant decline in economic activity spread across the economy , lasting more than a few months , normally visible in real GDP , real income , employment , industrial production , and wholesale-retail sales .
Broadly defined , a recession is a downturn in a nation 's economic activity .
A culture is a set of strategies and methods that people use to solve problems ; and , just as your desktop computer can operate on Windows 98 , Windows NT , Linux , Unix , etc. , so , too , can human biology ( i.e. , brains ) operate on different cultures .
One of the important aspects of Medicare Advantage coverage they should consider in selecting a plan is a comparison of each plans ' out-of-pocket maximum costs , the most an enrollee who stays within a plan 's network can pay in a year out-of-pocket .1 There is no cap on out-of-pocket expenses for someone in original Medicare alone .
The " Agreement on Aeronautical and Maritime Search and Rescue " negotiated under Arctic Council auspices and signed in 2011 , clearly defines the territory for which a nation is the primary responder , with responses augmented as required by other Arctic states .
Someone willing to commit a crime with a knife is the worst kind of criminal .
As you mentioned , the product I once searched for following me for a month is an all too common and wasteful example , especially if I already bought it at one of the many possible retailers .
Today the environment as a whole is the goal of our activities-and all the media of its determination : TV or artificial climate , transportation or clothing , telecommunication or shelter .
Judge said : does n't matter a law is a law , and I had to go to jail .
Perhaps a compromise is the solution .
And even though some CrossFit crazies think vomiting during a workout is a badge of honor , I hoped I would n't erupt my first time out .
A clearomizer is a cartomizer that has a clear transparent cover .
" If the place to go for a walk and see people in a city is the mall , it is a sick city .
Headstone in the shape of a cross is another very classy headstone design .
Being able to write a character is an essential skill that crosses over to recognizing characters when reading or using a computer-input method .
A dollar is a dollar - but what is it 's real value to you ?
Getting past $ 1 k a month is a struggle .
Multiple meanings or definitions for a word are a given ; I doubt if there is genuinely a monosemous word in the English language .
One of my favorite features on a car is the remote start button .
Imp An imp is a mythological being similar to a fairy or demon , frequently described in folklore and superstition .
the Folly In architecture , a folly is a building constructed strictly as a decoration , having none of the usual purposes of housing or sheltering associated with a conventional structure .
Obelisks An obelisk is a tall , narrow , four-sided , tapering monument which ends in a pyramid-like shape at the top .
Berm A berm is a level space , shelf , or raised barrier separating two areas .
Honorarium An honorarium is an ex gratia payment made to a person for their services in a volunteer capacity or for services for which fees are not traditionally required .
Facing them from behind a counter is the soda jerk , a middle-aged man who is smiling compassionately .
When a product is a non-organic agricultural ingredient such as cornstarch , in order to qualify as non-GMO in " Organic " and " Made with Organic " categories , the original organism that produced the ingredient must be non-Genetically Modified .
When a product is a non-organic non-agricultural ingredient , such as flavors and colors , the product must be free from Genetically Modified DNA or proteins .
There 's no getting around it : a budget is a requirement for good money management .
Israel is sliding towards fascism at an alarming rate , and the fact that people - such as most discussants here - imagine that by supporting its government they are doing Israelis a favor is a colossal mistake .
My initial contact with Cahoot via the telephone was completely unhelpful and my offer of an arrangement in the form of £ 5 a month was refused flatly after being informed £ 40 a month was the minimum required even though i stated my income was zero at that time .
No matter how much you might want to avoid the process , an interview is a crucial part of your initial teacher training application .
Lacan stresses that a need is a basic biological state that is capable of being satisfied by some appropriate physical goal , whereas an instinct is a drive to action , created by the anxiety or tension arising out of the underlying need .
His " social-brain " hypothesis postulates that the size of social groups characteristic of a species is a function of the size of the neocortex - the larger it is , the bigger the group .
That the Indian government should never have allowed to waste a single penny on even bidding to host such an event is a no-brainer ; and since when has the risk of gastroenteric disease for ' Westerners ' visiting India been front page news !
A pension is the last thing they think of .
One of the important properties of a semiconductor is the concentration of charge carriers .
Hiding behind boxes and at the corner of a wall were the only ones showcased at X 05 but we are sure there are loads more clever opportunities for this new feature waiting for us come December .
A person is the sum of their character traits , not a distillation of the most pronounced ones .
By this logic , racist speech is the same as physically attacking someone because of their color , or the acting out of a rape scene by performers in a video is an actual rape .
An anarchist is a voluntarist .
HERBERT KRETZMER : Yes , a song is a collection of phrases which have a certain resonance in a certain language with a certain culture .
And that is that , in a circumstance in which idleness is falling , the least idle member of a society is the most likely to become unable to fulfil his allotted tasks .
But the limitations of Hollywood 's interest in gay people is shown by the way they reward a straight actor playing gay , and announcing , as Jake Gyllenhaal did after the filming of Brokeback Mountain , that being asked to kiss a man was an extraordinarily traumatic and upsetting task .
' ( 2 ) A charity is a " parent charity " if it is ( or is to be treated as ) a parent undertaking in relation to one or more other undertakings in accordance with the provisions of section 1162 of , and Schedule 7 to , the Companies Act 2006 ( c 46 ) .
Or would a childminder be a better option ?
She said : " But to imply that having a baby is a dangerous procedure is a disreputable piece of scaremongering .
One of the key parameters which define the performance of a semiconductor is the concentration of the dopant .
He notes that a generation is an age group shaped by history .3 It is not enough on its own to be a generation , or a member of a generation , the defining factor is that history must somehow intervene with that generation to make it stand out .
He was the collective historian of a generation .36 As well as Black Day in July Lightfoot also penned Rich Man 's Spiritual a kind of parable in folk song form .37 A parable being a story with a lesson .
One who holds the belief that a clergyman is a priest .
Entering from the roundabout serving the A 2 , the first thing that strikes a visitor is the astonishing 18th Century wrought iron gates .
The main appeal of a conservatory is the extensive use of glass ; this allows for additional amounts of natural light to enter the room .
But doctors refused her desperate pleas to place him in intensive care because medical guidelines state that under 22 weeks a baby is a foetus and does not qualify for intensive care treatment .
What it is in a sense is the dictionary of our time .
A patch is a small piece of code that fixes a bug or adds a feature .
( An account is an identifier of membership and also a personalized user interface in SourceForge ; this allows the user to create , manage and contribute to software projects , provide a personal profile and contact data , receive payments , etc. ) Feature requests are extremely useful for developers in understanding what their users need .
A Housing is a problem , affordable housing a bigger problem .
We have a stable ABI , and a driver is a single file , so you copy that into the right place , maybe reboot , and that 's it .
" Meeting the 2012 deadline to give everyone a home is an internationally recognised target that Scotland has to meet .
A screenplay is a blueprint for the production of a film .
Just reading a screenplay is a skill in itself .
Not only do we seem to collect more stuff as we get older , but by law in several states the closet determines whether a room is a bedroom or an office .
One of the most important parts of the home when faced with a blaze is the doors , these help to contain the fire , starving it of oxygen which is a key fuel for house fires .
An anaesthetic is a treatment that prevents you from feeling pain .
One interviewee was continually encouraged to use his walking frame because , he was told , to use a wheelchair was a sign of ' having given up ' .
NT : Well , the classic need within a university is the roster ­ to be able to search for somebody 's name and get a list of results .
You ca n't emulate it , you ca n't break it down into smaller pieces and let people assemble objects from those smaller pieces ­ which is what you have at the moment in Perl , where a method is a function , a data structure can have a class associated with it , and that makes it into an object .
A difficult one , splitting the term into separate entities a photograph is an image that has been taken with a camera and Fine Art is something that has been produced for its visual beauty rather than its purpose or use .
An inventory is a binding legal document that provides an accurate written record of the condition and contents of a property at the beginning of a tenancy .
Having a baby is a natural life event and the place where you give birth is where you feel most comfortable and in control .
That misses the point ; you might use the social science to try and persuade someone that their opinion is wrong , but if a thing is a right then it is a right no matter what the survey says .
Ownership and carrying a gun is a civil right .
The only thing missing as this breakdown climbs to a crescendo is the sliding guitar feedback so familiar to the music of Sigur Ros and Spiritualised .
As a lot of people ρreviously κnοw , a phlebotomist is a specialised healthcare technician ԝho specializes in venipuncture , tҺe drawing of blood fоr tests reasons ( and blood transfusions ɑs properly ) .
Fix bug caused by applying settings to subdecks when a subdeck was a filtered deck .
This means that failures while the card is in learning no longer count towards a card being a leech .
What really matters to image Jesus as a priest is the personal choices he made , not his gender or the gender of the 12 apostles who obviously had to be male at that time ( see John 16:12 -13 ) .
I would n't say that a blogger is an author ... more like a columnist ?
A trial is a war .
As a lawyer who represents children in cases where maltreatment by a parent is the issue , " reasonable doubt " is all about what is " reasonable " to whoever gets to make the final decision in a given case , be it a jury or a judge .
If an author is a currently paid-up member of TCBA , his or her subscription will be extended by one issue .
A planisphere is a device which reduces the sphere of stars down to a plane .
it 's perfectly possible to make the moral point that capitalism emerges dripping with blood and gore ( as Marx does ' das ist der doux commerce ' .. ' there are your gentle arts of commerce ' ) without collapsing capitalism into a night were all cows are grey .
* ) 29 : type assertion = atom * clause 30 : 31 : ( * * An environment is a list of pairs [ ( x , e ) ] where [ x ] is a variable 32 : instance and [ e ] is a term .
* ) 34 : type environment = ( variable * term ) list 35 : 36 : ( * * A database is a list of assertions .
A myth is a story which it 's original tellers believed true , regardless of its truth-value .-
A myth is a true historic story told , not in prose , but in an ancient form of poetry .
A myth is an enigmatic narrative for an illiterate folk providing him / her the indecipherable etiological stories of the entire cosmos including all the creature who occupy it , more often , beyond his / her comprehension .
A myth is a short story that is told from childhood to adulthood .
A myth is a type of word that everyone has a different defenition for but my definition is , a myth is something that could be true or not .
An example is the Samari & aacute ; National Park in Crete , a first-class historic cultural landscape with its buildings , ancient cypress trees , and cultivation remains ; the park is now much invaded by pine which has made it flammable .
These powerful and important representations are not justice any more than a picture is a vacation , or the Mishkan is the Divine .
It seems that dreaming of a day is the only thing people of color are allowed to do to fight or acknowledge racism without stepping out of line in the eyes of conservatives .
A zoetrope is a spinning device that demonstrates how a series of individual pictures , glimpsed by the eye , are perceived as a fluid motion picture .
A compiler is a program which translates programs written in a notation suitable for humans into code suitable for execution by a computer .
In conventional programming languages , a program is a sequence of statements which are executed one after another in the order in which they are written .
A stack is a sequence of elements subject to the restriction that elements can be added or removed at one end only .
In this context , a vector is a sequence of consecutive locations in a computer 's memory .
The first formation of a strategy is a clear identification of your goal and your obstacles .
" A firefight is a very hard thing to photograph , " says Raimondo , who was still working at around midnight her time .
A coil of wire and a capacitor are the " duals " of each other , since one involves magnetism , and the other is based on voltage .
A capacitor is an electric voltage device .
A battery is a couple of metal plates immersed in liquid .
A wash is a body of water ; as in The Wash on the East Coast .
- why should they be immune from corruption investigations , after all a criminal is a criminal , white , blue or any other color , why the special immunity of some classes of people .
The most frequent evidence against a coiner was the possession of moulds and clay pipes containing metal residues .
After a lull in the 19th century , they became again popular as antiques in the 20th. The only other major antique combination of a large portable desk and a frame is the more delicate and humble Desk on a frame of the 18th century .
An escritoire is a small , portable writing desk with a sloping front door , hinged at the bottom edge , that can be opened downwards to provide a writing surface .
The secretaire a abattant is a nearly identical form , but usually in a French style such as Louis XV , Art Deco , etc. .
If a person is a director of a number of companies , his occupation may be shown as " director of companies " .
Where a person is a director of a holding company and of one or more of its subsidiaries ( not being wholly owned subsidiaries ) , he is required to give notice to each company within the group of which he is a director .
Picking worms out of a suspension is a different matter , however .
The Commission argues that the cost of an asset is the opportunity cost , the value of its best alternative use .
In essence , a derivative is a contract between two parties whom agree on given transfers of wealth between the two , the outcome of which depends on an underlying asset .
A cookie is a piece of information stored on your computer or mobile device by a website you visit .
What did seem out of place at such a test were the forty-two photographers , seventy-three Pressmen and a ' talkie ' set-up .
And he has not surrounded himself with pets - a rabbit and a goldfish is all he can claim .
A meme is a basic unit of imitation .
And , in wayfinding , a sign is a crutch .
Sitting down with a tutor to look over and discuss a paper is the best way to not only improve that paper , but your writing , and confidence , in general .
The day he gets an ego is the day it all falls apart .
Another word for a consumer is a heterotroph .
A carnivore which eats a carnivore which eats a herbivore is a tertiary consumer , and so on .
The oceans are a reservoir for water , while a cloud is an exchange pool .
He : Not ending a sentence with a preposition is a bit of arrant pedantry up with which I will not put .
A degree is a standard of education that you can take with you throughout various careers ensuring your future security .
EDF estimates that , at scale , on-bill repayment could create 600,000 job-years nationwide in the next 12 years ( a job-year is a full-time job that lasts for one year ) .
¶ ( These are supposed to be musical notes , just use your imagination . If you can believe a block is a hero in Adventure , this should be a breeze ) Dumb song , but would have made a interesting commercial .
A large number of units are amphibious , including some ridiculous ones ( really , grizzly bears can run at full speed across water ? ) , so a shoreline is no more protection than an empty field .
Not many realize a design is a house of cards .
" The thing that has always attracted me to astronomy as a field is the amount of creativity and thinking outside of the box that is needed , " Willman says .
A positron is a particle emitted from the nucleus that has the same mass as an electron but has a positive charge .
Some people assume that a compiler is a program that converts source code in one language into an executable program .
A compiler is a program that transforms source code into another representation of the code .
How do you represent that as an artist-it 's a difficult problem-without being totally politicized ?
It would be an oversimplification to assume that each job taken by an immigrant is a job lost by a native .
In some cases we assume that there is no probability that an individual is an illegal alien .
A session is a list of file names .
Answer : There 's no straightforward answer to the question of whether taking a taxi is the best option .
She 's got a fantastic series on : A Mind is a Difficult Thing to Change .
Another factor that I think plays a role is a deep human need for the things religion provides ; those who ca n't acknowledge that need and deal with it tend to fall into ersatz religious thinking with no awareness of the fact .
" The Dai-Gohonzon that Nichiren Daishonin inscribed in the form of a mandala is the enlightened life of the True Buddha Himself , possessing the Three Virtues of Sovereign , Teacher and Parent .
A bodhisattva is a compassionate being who voluntarily remains in the world of birth and death until achieving buddhahood so they can then save others by teaching the Dharma .
The motion of a raft is the needful motion ; it is gentle , and gliding , and smooth , and noiseless ; it calms down all feverish activities , it soothes to sleep all nervous hurry and impatience ; under its restful influence all the troubles and vexations and sorrows that harass the mind vanish away , and existence becomes a dream , a charm , a deep and tranquil ecstasy .
How natural an accompaniment is the picture of the Crucified Christ to the Zuni saying , " My Father , this day shalt thou refresh thyself with blood !
I end up poking anxiously with floury hands on my laptop trying to check whether a teaspoon is a teaspoon is a teaspoon .
And a tablespoon is a tablespoon is a tablespoon .
A tank is an armored vehicle with a large gun that moves on treads .
Currently available on the phone until there is a hybrid software / service which allows you to monitor a smartphone is no chance that your iPhone is a .
The attachment of a grounded lightning rod to a building is a protective measure which is taken to protect the building in the event of a lightning strike .
[U]nless the religious view that a fetus is a ' person ' is adopted .
In a blog post from 2010 , Chad Mosher points out that eating or drinking during an audition is a no no. Most people would n't dream of sauntering into the actual audition munching on a candy bar , but chewing gum is just as bad .
Eleven years ago , I debunked a " study " claiming a third of all men in homeless shelters were vets - noting it was based entirely on the men 's own claims , and that claiming to be a vet is a favorite panhandler ploy .
In this case using a distribution is a good solution .
Indeed , a satellite is a projectile .
Such a projectile is an orbiting satellite .
Research on an unexpected problem in the " cure for polio " and the development of a bioweapon are the crucial elements that we have been missing .
Announcing in such a public fashion that you 're going to remove advertising for a day is the equivalent to beating people over the head with a club and screaming , " Hey , look at us , we 're sensitive !
Wow the Xbox outsold PS 3 and Wii one week even a month is a big deal since Xbox 360 is still getting a huge enormous beat down .
The acceleration of gravity of an object is a measurable quantity .
While creating a budget is a good first step , the budget itself is meaningless if you do n't review it on a regular basis .
A projectile is an object upon which the only force is gravity .
The start of a year is the best time to familiarize yourself with deductions available to you .
A spectrometer is a spectrograph with measurement capabilities .
( A torr is a unit of pressure , equal to 1.316 x 10 -3 atmosphere .
In some cultures walking through a doorway constitutes a sacred act itself , as entering a home is a holy movement .
Developing for a console is an expensive enterprise , after all .
The only thing preventing the passage of such a resolution is a threatened US veto .
Doctorate in Geology : A PhD is the highest level of degree a person can get in geology .
An arroyo is a nearly vertically walled , flat floored stream channel that forms in fine , cohesive , easily eroded material .
Shopping for an apartment is a very exciting time ; but being prepared will help to prevent it from being stressful .
' Working on a novel is an entirely different animal : the nice thing about the world of novels , on the one hand , is that the writer is the most important person in the creative process .
A website is a place full of information on many aspects of the Zelda world .
However , renting a property is not as simple as buying a product ; there are many factors to take into account which can influence whether or not a tenant has a positive experience , not least the fact that renting a home is a very different , emotive experience than other major financial purchases .
The reader learns that an exposure is a technique used to counter phobias , anxieties and the rituals associated with keeping them at bay .
A charmer with the ladies , Jerry hides a fatal secret that Charley must overcome if he is to survive - no mean feat when such a threat is a hugely powerful vampire .
A phobia is any persistent fear of a specific stimulus object or situation .
Using a conditioner is a good idea , and one I recommend to anyone who uses their vehicle infrequently as it conditions the battery and keeps it in tip top condition .
Each ball was worth one point and a win was a 3 point bonus , for a total of 10 points .
Back in 1865 when William Booth founded The Salvation Army he was quoted as describing how the support he was providing to an individual was a two way exchange , " so much warmth and light from me but so much labour in return from him " .
As the weather warms up a picnic is a great way to spend an afternoon relaxing , so we 're offering a fantastic 15 % off all of our tartan rugs to keep you comfortable .
By all accounts McGonagall 's life as a poet was a continuous battle with hardship , disappointment and poverty .
Now , in the Mysteries , a hive was the type of the ark .
That censorship continued until late in the century , when it went by default , and is not likely ever to be revised , because a censored Mason and a Freemason are a contradiction in terms ; for if a Mason can be trusted to be loyal to the Craft in his behavior , so can he be trusted not to betray or to misrepresent it in what he says and writes .
It should be clearly shown whether such a person is a solicitor or a commissioner for oaths .
The same cross placed on a slant is the insignia of the Sovereign Grand Commander of the Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite .
The same cross placed on a slant is the insignia of all possessors of the Thirty-third Degree in the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite .
Cyrus had learned that a disaffected conquer people imported into a kingdom was a constantly menace and danger , and he returned the Jewish exiles to Jerusalem to rebuild their city and be a fortress and check upon Egypt .
Such an approach is the best way of developing proposals to see if they can meet the vision and objectives of the council .
The next room to get a makeover was the master bedroom and aga ...
A designer is an individual with the ability to express the very thoughts of an idea into a material object .
The very last thing you need at a festival is a stomach upset !
In medieval Europe the possession of a dovecote was a symbol of status and power and was regulated by law , with only nobles being allowed to have them .
The Reincarnationist is more than a page-turner-it 's a page-burner .
A galaxy is a collection of billions of stars and the gas that exists between the stars .
One of the first SF novels I read when I were but a lad was a Biggles story , and today 's on-line book search engines make it all too easy to go back .
The low throb of an engine is a world away from its high-pitched screaming banshee cousin of today .
I think a poet is a workman .
He explained : " We are strong believers in the fact a tablet is a completely different device , you get a completely different [ customer ] journey .
An Agreement is a legal document and the best way of understanding what it relates to is to purchase a copy of it and , where necessary , seek legal advice .
A reasonable-excuse is a contradiction in terms .
The last 25 years of a cycle is the foundation for the cycle to come .
Ellipse An ellipse is an oval shape .
An eyepiece is a small microscope that allows you to get closer than eight inches from that small fixed-focus image - and the closer you can get to an object , the bigger it appears .
Supernova A supernova is a cataclysmic explosion caused when a star exhausts its fuel and ends its life .
It was not always clear whether an entry was a signature or a code used to indicate why a medicine had not been given .
In music , for example , a triplet is a group of three notes which are to be played in the time of two ( or four ) notes .
The battle to get my inbox down to a page is a losing one so far ...
" But a CTBT is a crucial element of any overall nuclear non-proliferation strategy and it will prevent other nuclear-weapons states ( read China and Russia ) from testing or having confidence in radically new designs of nuclear weapons .
If a tenant is a non-UK national , for example , then a landlord may require the first rental payment to be , say , the equivalent of six months ' rent , and payable monthly thereafter , but he will also require a deposit .
A reprimand is a formal verbal warning given by the police if you admit you are guilty of a minor first offence .
( Really is a great high when one ' feels ' ... they 're in control and think they know an opponent 's every move and motives for certain actions ?
You have just shown a lad you obviously thought a lot of you love them by sleeping with them and sharing yourself with them , and a child is a beautiful result of that union .
' Using a hammer instead of a wrench does n't mean a wrench is a poor tool , it simply means it was not the best tool for the job at hand .
Redfield 's theory was that a hurricane was a great traveling whirlwind .
If you do n't have air conditioning , a fan is the next best thing .
A cube is a multidimensional structure consisting of dimensions and measurements .
The period of maturity in the life of a tree is the time of its fruit-bearing ...
y ( N.B. adding the ? before a name is a shorthand for universally quantified variables ) .
Inherent to such a perspective is the idea that human rights and freedoms are not only necessary but sacred .
A Website is a dynamic tool used to provide information and resources .
But , the education and training of a scientist is a CRITICAL piece .
" A seed is a random event , such as the current time of day in milliseconds , that is used to simulate a different sequence every time it is used .
A jam is the inevitable result .
And , yet , and this is not understood sufficiently , the poor as a group are an absolutely indispensable part of the city and of society as it is presently structured .
An example is the Calcutta Bustee Improvement Programme of 1971 .
" A dog is the only thing on earth that loves you more than he loves himself .
A calorimeter is a very broad band pass. What 's most important is that gratings only work on things that are point-like .
The fact that a tree has succumbed to a pathogen is no bad thing though in Dr Rayner 's eyes .
Such a notion is an abomination to capital ; it does everything it can to discredit the idea .
A leader is a life-healer who inspires one " through good mind " and protects [ him or her ] with[in] the divine dominion .
It means little whether a man is an Aryamna , a Varejena or a Khaetu , even non - Aryans were not to be excluded from taking part in the worship of Mazda .
Just to get that in context , a petabyte is a million gigabytes , which is the equivalent of 13.3 years of HDTV content .
Scrawled on a whiteboard are the words : " We will change how the Earth looks from space !
Synthesising all this in a lab is no easy task .
A lord is a person who is able to free the world from mental and physical evils , and the leader is a person who can lead the world to truth , precision , progress , wholeness , and immortality .
The only ones who require the noise of an exhaust are those people who want to look cool but really you all must be sole losers who require the help of that irritating noise to let the world know you exist .
An adverb is a modifier , and if you 're modifying the verb in an unexpected way that changes the meaning of the verb it can be a useful tool .
As time goes on the tools to do a migration are becoming more available but the fundamental fact is that a migration is a risky task and it takes effort .
A roux is a mixture of flour and butter which forms the base of a bechamel sauce or can be used to thicken a sauce .
The culture of an organisation is the typical way of working and thinking .
The heart of such a standard is a thermal element - a short heater wire with a thermocouple attached and enclosed in an evacuated glass envelope .
The first bishop to announce that he would give the Bill a trial was the Primate , Archbishop Crolly .
To linger on against my will on a half-life is no life at all .
A jury was a representative selection of freeholders ' sworn in ' by the sheriff or coroner for a particular purpose .
If for example it was found after he was sworn that a juryman was a close relative of the accused there is no remedy ; but the judge can always discharge the entire jury , and the other eleven would be re-called .
God , it 's a minefield being a vegetarian , is n't it ?
The objects and links in a model represent objects and relationships that are re-usable , can be abstracted , related , measured , etc. In other words , a model is a window of something larger that cannot be viewed in two dimensions in its entirety .
Draining and cleaning a pond is an important and necessary operation that needs to be carried out on a pond periodically if it is to stay looking healthy and well cared for. Over time a lot of mud builds up in the pond .
On both options the distance between the buttons in a pair is the same .
Thus a sensitive being is a kafuwa shareel , like the consciousness of a kafee bird , and a heart is a neeli paraan , the heart of a neeli bird .
One of the most important influences on the eventual airtightness of a dwelling is the location and the continuity of the primary air barrier .
More of a problem was the outbreak of widespread resistance to compulsory balloting for the militia that had been embodied at the outbreak of the War .
( A barony was a sub-division of a county ) .
For the regular orders , a school was a source of steady income which could be used for religious purposes .
The whole idea of an eye for an eye was an improvement over slaughtering every person in a family or tribe for the offense of one member .
In politics , after all , a week is a long time .
a crook is a crook .
By a law of Edward III membership in a guild was a necessary condition for obtaining the freedom of the city .
Turn off all the penalties and when a guy goes out for a pass be the guy covering him and just press B to tackle the guy and he wo n't catch it !
* 25 It is not because he is a leader of industry that a man is a capitalist ; on the contrary , he is a leader of industry because he is a capitalist .
Proffi already knows his fate at the hands of his friends , not expecting them to understand his innocent curiosity about the British soldier : " Anyone branded a traitor is a traitor forever .
They talk ' bout power and ' bout glory to gain To be an hero ' n ' get an order 's the main thing March into battle , you 'll see what is real Hell 's coming nearer and death 's on your heels Chorus : They 're scared - scared to death The agony is brutal - scared to death Ha , ha , ha they stand face to face with a gun What will be harder , the bullet - the man ?
A sale is a disposition of property for a price .
Recarey 's last act before becoming a fugitive was an attempt to wire $ 30,000 into the bank account of Washington consultant and lobbyist Nick Panuzio -- whose partner was then managing George Bush 's 1988 presidential campaign .
" Section 97 ( 1 ) provides that subsection ( 2 ) of that section shall have effect where " ( b ) an application is made under section 44 of the Administration Act for a declaration that an accident was an industrial accident .
A number is a sequence of digits and , optionally , a decimal point .
She is reluctant to go into the store , but a promise is a promise , so she goes into the shop with Betsy .
A territory An empire is an extensive territory under the same government .
An abstract is a miniature scientific paper that allows the reader to get a quick sense of what the longer paper is about .
A tiger is a tiger .
In Judaism , since marital love is considered holy , a wedding is an occasion of sacred and supreme importance .
In English a fag is a cigarette , not a ...
The difference between a demonstration ( or a protocol or a recipe ) and an experiment is the difference between I and II .
Llanrhystud , which also has an ysbyty was a Hospitaller possession , seemingly included in the confirmation of the physician prior of Llanthony , Geoffrey of Henlaw , after his election to the bishopric of St .
So making an effort is the most important thing to do and the biggest mistake is to do nothing .
After all , a bicep is a bicep , and there are tons of trainers who can teach you how to build one .
My own discovery of being a multiple was the beginning of a journey filled with pain , fear , depression , hope , joy , and understanding of myself .
Note Lynch 's ten clues : " An accident is a terrible event notice the location of the accident .
A fantasy is a step closer to that dream , but in reality .
What really makes a difference is the intensity , as in the crack of a shot from all the way across the map .
Without getting more into human psychology making a video , calling it a comparison video and giving a judgment is a very , very manipulative way of doing a comparative video .
The fallacy that because a disease is a major problem in Africa it may become one in the U.S. got its start with AIDS .
As discussed earlier in this lesson , a projectile is an object upon which the only force acting is gravity .
( The letters to the editor in my local small-town newspaper as a teenager were another excellent example : the violent homophobia and Hillary Clinton-hatred expressed there would make Counter Strike players blush .
A delegation is a learning tour .
One other element of the book that makes it great for passing along as a gift are the various resources listed in the last section : organizations to call ( including a great list of denomination-specific , GLBT-friendly religious groups ) , as well as organizations NOT to call .
A bigot is a bigot .
A storyboard is a sequence of images showing exactly how the application should work , from launch to game completion .
That Tredinnick is clearly a fruitcake is another matter entirely .
C ' mon , becoming an MP is the only job with national responsibilities , which requires absolutely no qualifications whatsoever .
Well every person you can know And every place that you can go And any thing that you can show You know they 're nouns A noun 's a special kind of word It 's any name you ever heard I find it quite interesting A noun is a person place or thing .
A noun 's a special kind of word It 's any name you ever heard I find it quite interesting A noun 's a person , place or thing .
A noun is a person , place or thing .
One of the 4 things frequent travelers have to consider before getting a dog is the added planning that goes into traveling with and without your pooch .
The player object is a trigger and when its collision box touches an enemy 's this code calculates which direction both objects are facing to determine which object gets destroyed .
The density of a medium is an example of an inertial property .
Being able to buy gametime by playing a game is a fantastic concept .
You seem to be under the impression that the value of a product is an objective fact .
The day the BBC shows an advertisement is the day they stop getting my TV license fee .
I do n't think there has been enough conversation about the way in which the banks are not just an industry-they are an integral part of the infrastructure of our economy .
And losing that one hot meal a day is a concern .
In the digital realm , the dense card management that makes Planechase such a grind is no problem at all , and the sometimes wacky rules that can lay waste to a player 's careful strategy are rather cute .
Such a frontier is the modern world of the advertisement , congenial , therefore , to the transitional culture of Bloom .
That a word is a structure , and therefore , no nomad would ever do such a thing .
A drug is a mirror .
Anything without a keyboard is a toy ?
Alan greenspan that a recession was a possibility later this year .
A camera is a vital piece of equipment ; it may be the only opportunity that you have to keep those precious memories , oh and lots of film too .
Al Lawrence had a five-minute rest towards the end of the match for getting too excited in his conversations with the umpire , but Harborne were unable to take advantage and , in the end , a draw was a fair reflection of the game .
It should be noted that , as the period of a pendulum is a function of the gravitational pull of the Earth , they have to be calibrated for both their height above sea level and the latitude of its location !
Playing against a human is the best way to experience Blood Bowl .
What is definitely a problem is the loss of riparian forest in the Kinabatangan river area but numerous NGOs are working hard to buy riparian acres back from palm oil plantations and replant forest .
But anybody who has driven around London will tell you , negotiating a city is a bit more complicated than just knowing which direction to go in .
Sinamatella with its chalets set in natural woodland on the top of a escarpment was a delightful place to stay with a very relaxing atmosphere and really good food .
But if a week is a long time in football , then six months is an eternity .
An example being the campaign against now Chief Justice John Roberts , including an advertisement aired by NARAL , which accused him of defending abortion clinic bombers .
One of the most important meals to me as a student was the occasional weekend mega-breakfast .
This survival guide for offenders and loved ones covers the months just before and after release from prison Furthermore a corporation is another body separate from yourself .
We really should have made our early advantage count , but a draw was a fair result in the end .
William , along with his younger brother , had been an inmate of the Guildford Workhouse and in the 19th century an apprenticeship was a very common way of dealing with the social problem of children whose families had fallen upon hard times .
A proton is a subatomic particle which can exist as part of an atom or on its own and has a positive charge .
When mine were kids , I think being a parent was a bit of protection because I wanted to protect them .
Earth against a structure is a conduit and direct route for water in the ground to reach a building .
A highlight was the delivery of " Gee , Officer Krupke " , injected with delicious humour !!!
For an actor to play a character who is so far removed from you as a person is a privilege because they have put their trust into your skills that you can pull that off .
But today people recognise that having gone for a moratorium was a success .
Cooper said : " I think a draw was a fair result on the day and the beauty of it is that we were both in the hat and we can give it another shot on Wednesday .
" A draw 's a draw .
A love of reading could have you considering whether running a bookshop is a worthy venture .
Meeting unexpected challenges and overcoming problems by learning to work as a team are all part of a JoLt expedition .
Although from older moulds these kits are still of a very high quality and even better are at great prices , an example being the 88 mm gun for £ 19.99 or the Panther at just £ 14.50 .
Not that I care , a bicycle is a means to an end for me .
This has simulated a query : If they a property is a retirement home , is the domestic refuse treated as the home 's trade waste or individual residents ' refuse with individual residents ' bins ?
However I have to stress again that a matcher is a temporary fix , you would be better correcting the problem which is causing the high SWR i.e. adjust the antenna or get one with a wider bandwidth .
From our babies christening , childhood , graduation , engagement and eventual marriage , a portrait is the time honoured way of preserving such moments and will be a treasured memory for generations to come .
suppose a pharmacist is a little different as gnerally just one on the premises in most cases .
" I am sure Jon Hill [ Exmouth coach ] wants to finish as high as he can as it is quite a prize being the best Devon team .
Ok , so a hospital is a hospital , but to be able to see a doctor when you want is a godsend .
In Brazil handshakes are accompanied by either a half-hug or a firm slap on the arm , depending on how close you are - saying hello to your mates after a tattoo 's a nightmare .
" Regulating your way out of a recession is the worst strategy of all .
i agree all housing benefits should be paid straight to the landlord but if a guy is a drug addict and he gets these " tokens " for food etc surely hes going to turn to other methods(robbery) that he would not have had to use before when he got cash to get his fix ?
A biggert is an overweight bigot .
Saying that they should sell for two-thirds of the price of a paperback is an arbitrary assertion .
Where there is a problem is the catch -22 situation with US troops being stationed in South Korea .
Taking a religion was a gradual process Imy faith has grown grafdually over the years so I cannot say there was any time of great religious conversion My parents told me about Jesus and about Santa Claus .
if your child is in reception as you say , it is most likley looking at labels like the ones in clothes tell us the size of someting , the ones in supermarkets tell us which aisle to find something etc. a label is a way of giving us information quickly with out us having to taste it , smell it , wear it ect .
Not wanting to get involved in an ' intergender ' punch up here , but I have heard so many times that " being a housewife is an unpaid job and that it is unfair on women " .
Its dangerous to look down at yourself when doing exercises such as these so a mirror is a godsend .
Take it from me , tell the truth as a lie is a lie .
In particular , a value is an expression that evaluation simplifies no further , such as the number 2 .
The dynamic extent of an expression is the sequence of evaluation steps during which the expression contains the redex .
More generally , however , a value is a reference to an object .
A location is the same as a top-level variable , but when a location is generated , it ( conceptually ) uses a name that has not been used before and that cannot be generated again or accessed directly .
A variable is a placeholder for a value , and expressions in an initial program refer to variables .
A phase is an integer that , again , is effectively a prefix on the names of module-level definitions .
A prompt is a special kind of continuation frame that is annotated with a specific prompt tag ( essentially a continuation mark ) .
A parameter is a setting that is both thread-specific and continuation-specific .
Such a doctrine is the last thing in the world that a seeker for an easy and blissfully happy land would invent .
Not only is Hendersons leadership a problem-so is the political situation at large in the city : Council Member McDuffy ( to his credit ) has his children are safely placed at a full school in NW DC , and yet there is continual churn in education for communities on the eastern side of the city especially in Ward 5 where I live and which he represents .
An employer is an individual or employing unit , which employs one or more individuals for some portion of a day .
Originally a steward was the keeper of the sty where the pigs lived ; this was too lowly for most humans and gentility raised the steward so that he became a bureaucrat , in charge of men not only pigs .
The popular launch pad for the consensus proof that man-made climate science is a crisis was the famed Michael Mann 1999 hockey stick graphic that purported to show that temperatures in the Northern Hemisphere in the last half century were the hottest in 1,000 years .
A hashtagblank , hashtagblank , hashtagblank followed by a delimiter is the input syntax for the boolean constant " true , " and hashtagblank , hashtagblank , or hashtagblank followed by a delimiter is the complete input syntax for the boolean constant " false .
A literal is an object one cannot make any assertions about .
Image An image is a primarily symbolic visual representation other than text .
Collection A collection is an aggregation of items .
Event An event is a non-persistent , time-based occurrence .
Service A service is a system that provides one or more functions of value to the end-user .
Sound A sound is a resource whose content is primarily intended to be rendered as audio .
Text A text is a resource whose content is primarily words for reading .
An examination is a procedure authorized by law .
" In a nutshell , a time-line is a vector of elements , where each element is obtained by iterated squaring of the previous element .
On the contrary , effective and unobtrusive coercion in a commons is a necessary condition for having any enduring freedom at all .
In the media side what we do a lot are these creative meta-analyses and we crunch huge volumes of data and look at , in addition to placement and format , what are some of the creative variables that could drive performance ?
A view is a special kind of collection that represents some base collection , but implements all transformers lazily .
A palindrome is a word which reads backwards the same as forwards .
Occasionally the need to check whether or not a number is a scalar ( Python (long)int , Python float , Python complex , or rank -0 array ) occurs in coding .
Because flying about calling yourself a pirate is a good way to attract the attention of the Imperial Navy , as well as bounty hunters and privateer competitors , and so each PC party chooses a Schtick for their group .
" A cackler was a performer who took only speaking parts .
The fee required for an application is the greater of 3 % of the proposed capital expenditure or $ 5,000 , with a maximum of $ 300,000 .
A myth is a mental model with which people try to interpret reality and respond to it .
It relies on the assumption that a whole is the sum of its parts .
It is central to mainstream economics that the price a good or service fetches in a marketplace is a measure of that item 's value to the buyer in his or her personal life .
Creating or changing a scheme is a simple matter of clicking on the swatch in the color list and selecting a new color .
If more people would try harder to make there marriage work there would be no divorce It 's easy to give up and blame your spouse for everything but a marriage is both ways everybody has faults it is how you react to them is everything .-
An exception was the year we got a 12 - inch rain .
A light-year is the distance light travels in one year .
Lining up for a panel is a tricky thing - and is more of an art than a science .
To some extent , a pattern is an attempt to establish " best practice " with respect to a problem or class of problems .
An application is a web of interactions between independent objects ( clients ) requesting and receiving services from other objects ( server ) .
( 1 ) Node : A node is the basic building block .
A mufti was a legal expert who offered advice on legal questions to any who wanted it .
The punishment is either execution by stoning or a hundred lashes ( fifty for a slave-half the number of lashes for a slave is a common pattern and I will not bother to note it hereafter ) ; the former punishment can only be imposed on an offender who has previously had lawful marital intercourse .
" moment and shut the door on this thing so we can all happily go to Chelino 's and get some chips and salsa and talk about how they should 've beat the Cavs worse but a win is a win .
Let 's Make a Framework is an ongoing series about building a JavaScript framework from the ground up .
Sometimes taking a break is all you need to get back into the swing of things .
( A measure is an aspect of user behavior , such as connections , Files Read , CPU usage and System Call Usage ) .
If £ 200 a month is the straw that breaks the camels back then those estate agents were going to go soon enough anyway .
A fireplace is the heart of any home and can add that finishing touch to your room or inspire a whole new decor .
I took up scuba diving , but my first attempt at keeping fish in an aquarium was a monumental disaster .
Stones , pebbles and rockery - a rockery is a perfect option for larger gardens , or as way of creating a centrepiece around a small fishpond , water feature or flowerbed .
One thing that helps a lot is the size of your client base .
But if an issue is that important , should n't it be possible to attract 100 MPs to close the debate ?
Regarding the scale of fees , as everyone in this business recognises , what might look expensive when a company is a long way from the precipice , can seem sweet reason itself when the turnaround team is the only thing standing between the company and oblivion .
Or a tram be the only way ?
And a degree is all you to get .
And while yes , in a real sense writing in general and blogging specifically can be considered " therapeutic , " a keyboard is no substitute for professional therapy and psychotropic medicine .
A picture is a moment of history etched onto an image ; the world 's been here for 4.5 billion years , dinosaurs walked the earth for 180 million years , humans have been here for 200 thousand years , and the first time a moment in has ever fully been etched into something that is n't memory was just two hundred years ago .
The composite score in a course is a weighted average of the scores in the mid-semestral and semestral examinations , home-assignments , and / or project work in that course ; the weights are announced beforehand by the Dean of Studies , or the Class Teacher , in consultation with the teacher concerned .
In simplest terms , a meteorite is a rock that falls to Earth from space .
Often , a television is a mere display , combined with elaborate surround sound systems with front and rear speakers and dedicated bass amplification .
a Louisiana judge agreed with the airline that serving food and ensuring safety on an airplane was a job that young single women were uniquely qualified to do , and therefore fell under the [ Equal Employment Opportunity ] law 's exemption for " bona fide occupational qualifications .
Some critics might contend that an airburst is the likely form of attack and surface explosions are irrelevant .
Here are sample sentences from our young readers : A boycott is a nonviolent way to protest and voice your opinion .
A postmark is a postal marking made on a piece of mail indicating the date and time that the item was accepted by the postal service .
Do you know that a hemorrhoid is a condition commonly experienced by many individuals during their middle to later years in life ?
If a user is a potential schizophrenic , it is hypothetically possible that using LSD could trigger the onset of psychosis .
Anyone doing less than a sheet a year is a dabbler .
With unconditional love that she showered you with every time , a mother is the only person in this world who would understand you and love you selflessly under every circumstance .
A tax is an involuntary fee - or , more precisely , " unrequited payment " - paid by individuals or businesses to a government ( central or local ) .
Can a page be an oval or a circle instead of a rectangle ?
See IRS Publication 15 , Employer 's Tax Guide , for more information on determining whether a worker is a common-law employee .
If a worker is a common-law employee , any amounts received that are not exempt under a special provision , are reported on Form W -2 as wages .
A silhouette is the outline of an object from the camera 's point of view .
Tilting a sundial is the only practical way to install a mass-produced garden sundial so that it will keep time .
In general , the best material for a face is a very light color to give a high contrast with the shadow .
The classic shape for a heliochronometer is an equatorial bow sundial , a semicircle of temperature-invariant steel invar , with markings on the inner surface .
A cardioid is the shape that connects the intersections between the solar-time marks of a conventional sundial , and the equal-angles of a true clock-time face .
An isochrone is a linear representation of an equal time interval from a specified location and thus can be used to display results from an accessibility analysis in terms of travel time .
Definition : A haiku is a short poem that uses imagistic language to convey the essence of an experience of nature or the season intuitively linked to the human condition .
Definition : A hokku is the first stanza of a linked-verse poem .
Definition : A senryu is a poem , structurally similar to haiku , that highlights the foibles of human nature , usually in a humorous or satiric way .
Definition : A renku is a linked-verse poem in the popular haikai style , particularly as practiced by Bashô and later poets writing in his style .
Definition : A haibun is a terse , relatively short prose poem in the haikai style , usually including both lightly humorous and more serious elements .
An example is a 36 - year sentence for passing a series of bad checks .
May the condition , manner , or duration under which a major life activity can be performed be considered in determining whether an impairment is a disability ?
Having a job is a privilege , not a right .
Many nonbelievers take this to mean that he shared the proto-atheist philosophy of Thomas Paine , whose Deism was definitely that of a pre-Darwinian atheist who simply thought that a god was the logical explanation for our coming into being , but not for anything since that time .
Posting it , sending it out into cyberspace and then not hearing a word is another thing entirely .
Surely such a project was an immense and long-extended task for scattered peoples of " confused tongues " who had never seen writing or analyzed their speech before .
For instance , a malicious user may be able to determine what sort of criteria the site uses to declare that a host is a scanner .
Having a faith is a hard issue for all Christians , trying to believe in what you cannot see is not only hard for Adults today but even harder for teenagers when we live in a ' culture of seeing is believing ' , within this time the teenagers were invited to participate in a game which involved trust !!
Now , if using such a photo is a heinous crime , do pray tell us Iain what that means the Tories in Ealing have been up to .
However , a win is a win so I will take it .
A contract is a contract .
In 1924 , he published a poem called " The Boxer 's Girlfriend " , and in his first major work , The Tragedy of Mister Morn ( see below ) , the protagonist , Morn , talks about a fist fight with expert attention to specific punches : a hook is a " comma " , a jab a " full stop " .
The human problem of how to conduct oneself as a subordinate is the subject matter of much of philosophy and religion .
The job of a surveyor is the one that we get asked about the most .
Today there is a broad consensus that such a standpoint is an impossibility , and that , in order to understand religion , it is necessary to experience it from within , indeed , that only such experience , which is inevitably particular and tied to a definite historical starting-point , can lead the way to mutual understanding and thus to a deepening and purification of religion .
Such a legacy is a fitting tribute to those hard working pilots and men who earned their living from these legendary craft .
A neurotic is a man who builds a castle in the air .
A psychotic is the man who lives in it , and a Psychiatrist is the man who collects the rent .
' In the European Middle Ages a bestiary was a collection of stories , each based on a description of certain qualities of an animal , plant , or even stone .
A grain is the weight of a grain of American wheat and there are , I understand , 7006 to the pound .
' In information theory , the Levenshtein distance or edit distance between two strings is given by the minimum number of operations needed to transform one string into the other , where an operation is an insertion , deletion , or substitution .
[ 1 ] On that occasion he declared that the words of ' A Man 's a Man for a ' that ' should form the basis of a universal plea for tolerance in the face of prejudice and ignorance .
[ 9 ] The reference to the ' coward slave ' - in the first verse of ' A Man 's a Man for a ' that ' - refers to one who would willingly debase himself and allow himself to be dominated by another .
[ 10 ] Robert Burns , ' A Man 's a Man for a ' that ' , in Complete Works , p 500 .
Answers Clarity 's I Ching Newsletter : Issue 24 " One who asks a question is a fool for five minutes ; one who does not ask a question remains a fool forever .
In essence , we try to assess what the reasonable parent would consider appropriate for their child at a particular age - a rule-of-thumb being the older the child the more tolerant the parent is likely to be .
Requesting a crawl is a great way to quickly get your courses on learnpipe .
A monument is the least we can do .
A bulkhead is a dividing structure of two rooms , usually used in offices to divide a separate office or cubicle space .
The pub is going from strength to strength and good luck to Graham and Chris they deserve to have as a great a pub is this with all the work put in .
A comparison being a £ 200 bill for car repairs , without specifying what parts were replaced , or materials used etc. Surely , we cannot be excluded on this scale any longer .
The lady did not think that a refuge was the best place for the children unless there was no where else to go .
All of us have this inner place ; a retreat is an opportunity for a given group of people to discover that place , gently and carefully , in an environment of peace and beauty .
Such a statute is the Obscene Publications Act , passed in 1959 and subsequently strengthened and amended to allow every conceivable method of reproducing obscenity ( even " data stored electronically " ) to be represented .
A costume is a must have for a themed night like a 70 's Disco .
Foretold by Nam June Paik in 1968 when he declared ' TV without a box is no longer TV , but a video " environment " 19 ' .
' ' The majority of our members are Hong Kong artists , but quite a number are those from various provinces of China .
( 1 ) An inspector is a public officer for the purposes of the application of section 487 of the Criminal Code in respect of an offence under this Act .
Lynn 's suggestion about getting a wheelchair is a great one .
The book as a whole is the toy .
A hub is a Physical Layer device ; it operates on the bit level , accepting one bit at a time , regenerating the signal , and repeating it on all of its outgoing ports ( except the one it arrived on ) .
The Court acknowledged that a warrant was an " ordinary requirement " for entry to a dwelling under the Fourth Amendment .
Even my own self in a photo is a stranger to me .
A DPA is an essential disability and incapacity planning tool which allows a principal to appoint an agent to manage thier property , finances , and personal affairs .
A map is any examination between machines regardless of whether it involves geographical mapping .
Being a doctor is a noble profession and in reality doctors in the Middle East should be the most empathetic , because they are far more respected and regarded than anywhere else in the world .
For Agilists an issue is the accuracy of the baselined plan .
Such a translation is a called a semantic model .
' From that source of authority and principle the court deduced and declared this conclusion : ' A pardon is an act of grace , proceeding from the power intrusted with the execution of [ 236 U.S. 79 , 90 ] the laws , which exempts the individual on whom it is bestowed from the punishment the law inflicts for a crime he has committed .
Turning , then , to the other side , that is , the effect of a pardon on him to whom it is offered , and completing its description and expressing the condition of its consummation , this was said : ' A pardon is a deed , to the validity of which delivery is essential , and delivery is not complete without acceptance .
Given what we know about the comic world , becoming a superhero is a logical reaction to having powers .
He is the author of To Steal a Book is an Elegant Offense : Intellectual Property Law in Chinese Civilization ( Stanford University Press , 1995 ) and scores of articles concerning Chinese law and legal history , U.S. - East Asian relations , international law , the legal profession , and other subjects .
" While , in some cases , the fact that a plaintiff is a highly sophisticated individual ( or , more often , corporation ) , will make it harder to prevail in a fraud case , on the grounds that they should have known better .
As Joel Seligman , the dean of Washington University School of Law and an expert on securities regulation , put it , " Oftentimes , a settlement is the best the SEC is capable of rationally bargaining for. " And the SEC is always mindful that its actions do n't just affect corporate wrongdoers .
Rather , an analyst is a sort of truth-attractor for the analysand 's desire .
Anyway in a semi-enebriated state , here are some proposed clarifications to the lyrics : I notice that you have " sold it for a tenna " Being English folkies they hark back to the days when a pound was a pound , and worth 6 USD and you could buy 20 Arran sweaters and a bag of organic carrots to stick in your ear for it .
ninjanurse on A mortgage is a terrible inves ...
Any revolutionary leader who invents the slightest thing to get anyone 's attention or invents an accident is a criminal of the worst sort .
A fiction is a thought experiment .
There was a large market on his right as he went up the boulevard , and ahead of him on the side of a mountain was a theater that seated twenty thousand people .
[ But ] used to decide whether a man were an economist at all .
Francis Walker did not say that belief in laissez-faire determined " whether a man were an economist at all .
It was used to decide whether a man were an economist at all .
A balance was the normal device used in weighing payments .
Though little mainstream research exists to support the uniqueness of webbings , Zercie convinced a judge that a comparison was the court 's best hope for justice .
Hi , Steve " A text without a context is a pretext .
Firstly , there is still a good vein of humour running through it ( Kuwabara having a dream about resurrecting Yusuke with a kiss is a good example ... ) , secondly it does n't completely lose the emotion of the first five episodes , and finally the characters and character interactions are superbly done , particularly the exchanges between Yusuke and Botan .
If you take part in any battles then gloves , body armour and a helmet are the minimum required .
For most , a dream is a place in a Royal Ballet itself .
Its location , being at the bottom of a steep hill , on a fast moving road and on the outside of a bend is the worst possible place to position a new roadside feature .
In mathematics a per-cent-age is a way of expressing a number , especially a ratio as a fraction of 100 .
In the legal sense , a discovery is a deposition by which one side in a litigation elicits information from the other side concerning the facts in the case .
Saint Isidore said : ' A man is a complete fool if he goes straight back and does the same thing over again , when he has just repented it .
A man is a hypocrite when he conceals his true self and presents to the world a false persona .
' A man sometimes possesses this virtue naturally , for as the philosopher says : ' A man is a living thing , by nature gracious and amenable to reason and to goodness ; but when natural graciousness is enhanced by God 's grace , then it is more valuable still .
' The man who is a glutton is an easy prey to all the other sins as well ; he will be a servant to all of the vices , for it is the devil 's hoard in which he rests and hides .
Spiritual kinship is that between a godparent and a godchild ; for just as a man who conceives a child is the child 's natural father , so a boy 's godfather is his spiritual father .
It was fairly obvious that the Lord would never sell to Jimmy and Vince could involving Bassini as an intermediary be a way round it ?
What is quite a surprise is the darker side of the movie by which I mean those who are killed by the native Indians .
A portière is a hanging placed over an entrance to a room .
To be a representative is a great privilege and a great responsibility .
A crime is a crime .
The immediate post-match on-pitch interview , for example : McLeish : ' ... and in relative terms for a small club like Birmingham to put one over on an Arsenal was a titanic , titanic effort for the players ...
Hodgson satisfied by England draw England boss Roy Hodgson says a point was the most his side deserved from the World Cup qualifier against Poland .
Where a business is no longer trading or has gone into liquidation you may need to complain to the Financial Services Compensation Scheme - the " final safety net " for customers of failed FSA-regulated firms .
Using Ginny as a narrator is a good choice .
Achieving brightness of vowel timbre , indeed , is a cardinal matter in performing these motets , not only because of the tendency to a certain veiled quality which is present in all polytextual music , but also because vowel colour in a motet is a crucial part of each melodic line 's assertion of independence .
' Someone floating in a tank is an indeterminate blob , ' he says .
If a teacher is a Christian should she be employed at all - the majority of people in this country have no faith .
an opinion is an opinion and advice is advice , and its up to the person asking the question wether to take the advice , and if they choose not to , they should get called names , swore at and degraded over me just showing what my sub runs like , just trying to help anyone out there considering getting one , being thoughtful and trying to help , rather than just swearing and being rude !
Recommendation by someone who uses a garage is the best way of finding one .
I agree that it is private property but driving off after a collision is an offence .
The wiring of 2 amps in a corsa is a doddle .. just bridge them or strap them together , which ever phrase you want to use .
I 'm sad that my first post as a member is a problematic one but hopefully you guys can help , I 've bought my first audi a 2005 a 3 tdi 2 l sline dsg and when driving the other day a bulb fault light popped up saying drivers dipped headlight , I checked the xenons when I pulled over and they were working but the drivers side did flicker a bit , further down the road and the light went out .
' A whore is a deep ditch , and a strange woman is a narrow pit ' ( Prov 23:27 23:27 ) .
What helps us in gauging the impact level of a conference is a rigorous peer-review system for submitted papers .
I try not to get too driven by impact factor numbers - for me , the real value of a conference is a place to meet peers and friends , present and receive feedback on my work , and find out - and be inspired by - what others are doing .
didactic poetry - poetry which gives instruction on a given topic ; an example is this type of work is Lucretius ' On the Nature of the Universe .
30 a TV is a hyperlocal success story .
A control is a reference to an node , to which , in certain conditions , the user agent will route events , and from which the user agent will determine the state of the hit region for the purposes of accessibility tools .
Creating an interest while young and holding that as a priority is the key for greater involvement .
" Five days in a vacsuit is an endurance record I do n't ever care to break .
We cannot say that a photon is a wave or a particle until it is measured , and how we measure it determines what we will see .
But now what a thing is the soul , that the body itself must be it 's clothing !
O what a thing is the soul of man , that above all the creatures in heaven or earth , being made in the image and similitude of God .
But , I say , what a thing is this , that God , the great God , should choose to have fellowship and communion with the soul above all .
O what a thing is the soul !
The difference between a religion and a delusion is the number of people who share it .
Therefore , to steal and rob , as they do with their usury , from a heathen is a divine service .
In reality , a backpack is a should for a girl .
A zoetrope is a circular device with slits cut vertically in the sides that has either individual drawn images or a set of sequenced photographs arranged on the inside .
A pediment is a gently sloping erosional surface or plane of low relief on bedrock .
It 's a typical guise used in anime and manga to signify that a character is a burglar , or sneak thief .
In a sector of the world where many differences seem to exist , the commonality of healing one child at a time is a challenge and indeed an opportunity .
[ 133 ] Up to now therefore , in most cases still , the earliest date that a foreigner can assert in such a conflict is the date of a foreign patent application from which his United States application claims priority under the Paris Convention or a reciprocal arrangement between the United States and the country of the original filing .
--- Well for a start is this a new concept or a novel and relatively unknown name for an old concept ?
A database is a PrevalenceLayer with pre-defined CommandPatterns .
" The district as a whole is a National Historic Landmark , and contains numerous individual historic buildings .
The reputability of a belief is a function of the number of its adherents and the wisdom of its adherents .
On the flip-side , I 've listened to lots of crap that I 'm glad I did n't get stuck paying for. Buying content , whether music , or a movie is a pig-in-a-poke .
The fact that , today , spiritual meditation in its abstraction from institutionalized religion appears as the zero-level undistorted core of religion , hinges on the fact that such a meditation is the ideological form that best fits today 's global capitalism .
Such an example is the universal Singular : a singular entity which persists as the universal in the multitude of its interpretations .
The basic lesson of psychoanalysis is that one can not only desire but even PROHIBIT something which does n't exist , and that such a prohibition is a cunning strategy to make it ( appear to ) exist .
Even more of an exception are the independent and non-institutional theatres in general .
An improvement is the double-elimination tournament which is now one of the best known tournament systems in sports .
In the old days one of the toughest countries in which to secure a patent was the Netherlands .
Perhaps securing such a sponsor was a lost cause to start with , although the KLA succeeded where Rugova failed , but Rugova misled his people into sanguineous devastation by declaring the " Kosovo Republic " before the time was right .
As you may know , cleaning / treating a pool is a process that has multiple steps .
Engaging in such a tefila is a tremendous opportunity for a person .
A citizen is a friend but the government personnel are servants of the people , whatever place they hold .
A child having a tantrum is a miserable as the parents feel trying to cope with the emotional rage .
It is of no significance whether an individual is a man or a woman .
It is calculated that such a summer is a one in about 800 year event .
The thing is the groom is barely out of high school ( and a Roman Catholic one at that - what an earth were the leaders of a protestant church thinking about when sending him there ) , and had not been with her that long .
Fitting can be arranged but simple DIY skills and a drill are all that is required .
Becoming a father is the biggest , best thing that 's ever happened to me and it made the decision relatively easy .
" A medal is a complete fantasy really , a dream , but I suppose dreams do come true .
A footpad is an archaic term for a robber or thief specializing in pedestrian victims .
" Next step is to turn a crowd into an audience - a drunk man will attract a crowd but an audience is a completely different thing !
So a metaphor is a game bird and a crustacean is a simile ( or a smilie ( :)) I find them difficult to differentiate at this time of year due to the winter plumage !
I think you have taken the phrase too literally , I did n't say you had to have a billion to live like a millionaire , my point was that in the past a millionaire was a rarity but now it 's the billionaires that are the elite .
A cluster is a collection of nodes that appear as a single-server system .
Giving users a choice is a far better option than simply taking features away and saying this is the way forward like it or lump it .
A threshold is a limit ( high or low ) placed on a specific monitored metric .
Now , the question is , what sort of a man is a fit and proper person to represent this , or , in fact , any other borough in Parliament ?
He was perfectly convinced that the intention of the Reform Bill of extending the elective franchise , unless it were accompanied by a general system of education , would be a curse rather than a blessing-would be a sword and a spear in their sides instead of a means of defence .
Calling " what is " ( " Mah " in the Zohar ) a sefirah is a way of recognizing that everything that exists and that happens , just as it exists and happens , is a manifestation of Divinity .
This caused no confusion , as the Proto-Semitic consonant represented in Hebrew by the letter kaph was long pronounced only " hard , " like the English letter k ; its alternative pronunciation ( which we now associate with the absence of a dagesh is a relatively late development in Hebrew .
In a dismally short time period ( 10 years for a star is a flash or less ) , Capella could have revealed short time scale high energy activities via Chandra .
The basis weight of a paper is the designated fixed weight of 500 sheets , measured in pounds , in that paper 's basic sheet size .
Researchers concluded , essentially , that a calorie is a calorie , regardless of whether it comes from a low-carbohydrate or a low-fat diet .1 They did not find any consistent evidence that the low-carb diet makes it easier to lose weight than the low-fat diet , but neither did they find any consistent evidence for the reverse .
A memristor is a pipe that changes diameter with the amount and direction of water that flows through it .
Hiking with a dog is a wonderful bonding experience for canine and human alike .
" Twelve to 20 people in a sample is the standard , he says , " but ZMET gives the essence of what we get with still fewer people .
The preferred size of a control is the size that it would best be displayed at .
An algorithm is an abstract concept unrelated to physical laws of the universe .
Locating that back as a bracelet is a nice improvement on the idea .
Proving an illusion is a giant epistemological problem , which is one reason the authors recruited so many participants for their study - although many of the thousands were recruited from a website sponsored by a French reality show , Leurs Secrets du Bonheur ( The Secrets of Happiness ) .
Thomas cited wergild ( blood money ) payments as one example : " Killing an Anglo-Saxon was a costly business , but killing a native Briton was quite cheap .
It 's not just a justification , or an excuse-it 's the thought that rings in your head through every second of the show .
Adding value to a product is a way to sell that same thing in a multitude of ways .
A lock is a blocking operation .
the basic architecture of a server is another example , the way to achieve the shortest latency in a server is to dedicate a thread to every request so that there will be a minimal amount of context switches , the problem with that aproach is that it has a limited throughput due to the high price of managing a large amount of threads .
By contrast , an asset is a possession or quality with value in exchange as well as in use .
Q : Using the supermarket frequent shopper program as an example , what forces are at work to protect against a consumer being the victim of unwanted intrusion ?
What 's more interesting to a developer is the maximum total audience for any given version .
One recent newcomer that 's worth a mention is the Hodge Swab .
Well , if you consider that a legend is a story surrounded in mystery and intrigue with no real basis in provable fact , then that 's pretty much what what constitutes a clearout in the workshop .
Having said that - the only Scarborough trawler to be sunk in the war by a mine was the Condor in June 1915 .
Those men who most closely approximate to such a role are the long term unemployed , usually without direct childcare responsibilities , and often older men , who sense their worthlessness from their inability to sell their labour power .
What is decisive in deciding the class nature of a party is the way in which a series of factors-the party 's policies , its membership , its electorate , links with the unions , etc-combine to determine how the working class relates to that party .
Today the main thing stopping the Socialist Alliance ( SA ) from moving towards becoming a party is a lack of political will , above all on the part of the SWP .
Getting heat by burning a fuel is a simple example , but you will probably have come across lots of others in the lab .
The Crown conceded that a video was a ' document , for the purpose of the relevant rule .
That so many should be removing to a distance is an event unparalleled in the history of the church .
If the number of recordings of a work is a correlative of its cultural value , then the opposite would actually seem to be the case .
A nucleophile is a species that attacks positive ( or slightly positive ) centres in other molecules or ions .
A hearing is a pre-trial hearing if it relates to a trial on indictment and takes place after committal , sending , transfer or service of a voluntary bill of indictment but before the start of the trial .
However , the fact that a breach has or may have affected the result of an election is a factor to be taken into consideration in deciding whether proceedings should be instigated .
An attempt is an offence of specific intent .
In such a case , an estimate is the best the customer is going to get .
One of the most popular routes for families and those that have n't cycled for a while is the 8.5 mile Monsal Trail .
Failure to surrender to bail granted by a court is a serious offence .
Surely the worst thing that can happen in a school is the death of a pupil .
C. was a happy , much-loved child and her death from choking on a crayon was an almost unbearable event .
A gene is a hereditary unit consisting of a sequence of DNA that occupies a specific location on a chromosome .
A cookie is a small piece of text that a website asks your browser ( such as Internet Explorer ) to save to your computer when you visit the website .
A Physiatrist is a physician with expertise in the orchestration of the rehabilitation process .
A pistol is an emergency defensive weapon designed to turn someone off who is trying to kill you at close range .
An example is the degenerative changes , deformity and pain which eventually occur in knee joints which become hyperextended due to the lack of protection from adequate muscles .
A migraine is a headache involving recurrent attacks that can last up to three days and sufferers may also experience double vision , nausea and vomiting .
Also : Often the failure of an alternator is the result of a blown diode or a worn out bearing , etc. These parts are not expensive and their replacement is not difficult with the right tools .
Whether sacramental marriage is undermined merely by calling such a legal contract between gays a marriage is a matter of opinion --- not a matter of doctrine .
" The interlinear note following reads : " A mamzer was the half-caste offspring of a Jewish father and a non-Jewish mother .
A noun is a word like horse , house , person , idea , table - a name for something .
A conflict is a red flag .
Updated 4th October 2008 The entrance , in a wooded area , is a steep mud slope under a small rock face where a handline is a help .
An effect is the result of something : the fireworks produced some dramatic effects ; sacking all the staff had no effect .
Principal means major or main ; a principle is an ethical guide .
While most of the Team are married - it goes without saying that they are married to saintly women who tolerate their obsession with Drill Team riding , a week is a long time for Smiddy as far as relationships are concerned .
It was Fowler whom Churchill was quoting when he famously said that such a rule was an imposition " up with which I will not put " .
( ii ) A genus is a group of similar or closely related species .
A genus is a group of similar or closely related species .
A conversation is a circular form of communication , with understandings being exchanged between the conversational partners yet with variation ( even misunderstanding ) inherent in the role of both the medium and of the other .
] a programme is a function of what attitudes and values you bring to it " ( 1988 : 162 ) .
The first inquiry under the Act which dealt with a disaster was the inquiry into the loss of H M Submarine Thetis on its maiden voyage in June 1939 which involved the deaths of 99 men .
" Feeling something , picking it up in your hands , walking into an environment is a far more powerful brand promise than anything you are simply told through traditional media alone .
Getting a laugh is a great way to get a product to stick in a listener or viewer 's mind .
Worth a visit is the Maritime Museum , with its models of ships and other sea-going paraphernalia which opens 10 am - 2 pm and 5 pm - 8 pm .
Standing in a field was a large , open doorway , with the frame supporting itself , and stepping through it , though diminished in stature to ensure the background could easily be seen , was a man , evidently himself ; but , instead of further pasture behind the door , there was a coastline with sheer cliffs and a quiet sea .
" If a headache is all you have , you can count yourself very fortunate indeed .
Gorian - not saying a lie is a lie , just showing some data is available .
2 ) Ships surprisingly move at a fair clip , blind firing a missile at an MGR / GPS co-ords and expecting a hit is a matter of luck and guesswork .
Being lectured now on how to manage an economy is a little bit like being given a talk on seamanship by the captain of the Costa Concordia-another believer in light-touch steering .
A scab is a scab , wherever they come from .
An example is the New Deal for Communities programme which seeks to address multiple deprivation caused by poor job prospects , high crime levels , under-achievement in education , poor health and inadequate housing and physical infrastructure .
Yet an individual head above a parapet is an easy target .
This dirty monster of a sampler is some my favorite punk sounds from the days of my youf !!
A nanoparticle is a particle with at least one dimension less than 100 nanometres ( One nanometre is a billionth of a metre ) .
Making a difference was the central thrust of her work .
In conjunction with Greene King , a fit out will be completed to a point were a site is ready to trade , with the company looking to the franchise owner for a proportion of the cost .
Buying a home is a special experience that everyone should get to enjoy .
Here at Ella 's Events , we understand that a wedding is a huge financial investment , and can be ...
And as Tyrone explained to Tommy Duckworth ( Chris Fountain ) a family is all Ty 's ever wanted , so , determined to make it work , he asked Kirsty to move back in with him , and will soon propose to her .
Back in 1994 , Acorn demonstrated the RiscPC and said that multiprocessing with 4 ARMs in a box was a possibility .
Buying a home is the biggest purchase buying a new home , a vacation property , a townhouse , a mobile home , at the very least , a person with bad credit can receive a personal paycheck advance loan .
Dr Tolle : We do know by age that the older a person is the less likely they are to favour assisted suicide .
MIKE , a vISP is a " Virtual Internet Service Provider " ; they resell the services of other ISPs , branded as their own .
The vinculum substantiale , on the other hand , is concerned with a strong notion of reality and ensures that a being is a genuine unity .
If , however , a body is a phenomenon of God , if it is an object of God 's scientia visionis , then the body can be said to be real , for God knows the relations that exist between the constituent monads from which result the body .
At a year , a dog 's a teenager , equivalent to a 16 - year-old human , with a little filling out still to do .
Web services as a class is an incredibly flexible solution that is already becoming very disruptive in this segment .
A terrier is a formidable opponent for a fox .
So one can say , " A man is a man through man-ness and man-ness does not need another man-ness to be man-ness " ( Risālah fi ' l-wujūd ) .
A profile is a sequence of ballots , one from each voter .
Formally , this means that voting methods must be total functions on the space of all profiles ( recall that a profile is a sequence of ballots , one from each voter Here , I am assuming , as is typical for this literature , that the ballots are the linear orderings over the set of candidates ) .
" A command is an order , " Lowry writes , " not a suggestion or a basis for discussion .
No equipment or extra materials are included with the DVD , but light hand weights ( typically 2 to 5 pounds ) and a mat are the only things needed for the Personal Training with Jackie : Xtreme Timesaver Training routine .
However , some of Leibniz 's other claims entail that a clock is a machine in its smaller parts down to infinity .
Now I could n't find in the rules that a forfeit is a loss of a point although I see on the standings that my team lost a point in the first week for our forfeit ( I may have just missed it in the rules though ) .
if a forfeit is a loss of a point then both Loaded and BNB should also be losing a point for not fielding teams that night .
Another problem that requires a solution is the " fish bellying " of the boiler halfway along the firebox .
A pelt 's a pelt 's a pelt , I would n't doubt .
Likewise , in Montague semantics the meaning of an expression is a function which has as domain the triples .
The content of a sentence , with respect to a context , is a proposition , and the linguistic meaning , or character , of an expression is a function from contexts to contents .
Such a cell is a frontier of consciousness .
Please remember , a webcast is a service of the individual broadcaster .
Such a guidescope is a substantial instrument in its own right , adding a lot to the whole setup 's cost , size , weight , and demands on the mounting .
An example is the study of evolution .
Probably the single most important phenomenon in the development of a biofilm is the process of microbial adhesion either to the substratum or to other adhering cells be they of the same or another species .
A signature is a characteristic byte-pattern that is part of a certain virus or family of viruses .
The bulk sweeteners lycasin which is a mixture of dextrins ; the sugar alcohols xylitol and sorbitol ; and sorbose , a ketose are each compared to sucrose .
The elements comprising a picture are related to each other in a determinate way : " A picture is a fact " .
The semantical circuit between a proposition and its sense is not closed until a further component is introduced , for what also finds its expression in a proposition is a thought .
" [ 3.11 ] Wittgenstein seems to have the activity of thought in mind , although he elaborates very little beyond remarking that " a propositional sign , applied and thought out , is a thought " , and immediately after that " a thought is a proposition with a sense " .
A turnpike was a road or highway which was controlled by a turnpike trust and maintained by tolls exacted from those who used the roads .
Perhaps the main reason to install a conservatory is the added space you , your family and your belongings will be afforded .
An ideogram is a character or symbol that represents an idea or a thing without expressing the pronunciation of a particular word or words for it .
A spell is a story we tell ourselves that shapes our emotional and psychic world .
A supermoon is the coincidence of a full moon or a new moon with the closest approach the Moon makes to the Earth on its elliptical orbit , resulting in the largest apparent size of the moon 's disk as seen from Earth .
Remember that planting a tree is a commitment to a long-term relationship of care and nurturing .
How It Works A snowboard is a single board that is both shorter and wider than traditional downhill skis .
An inventory is a file that describes the history of a repository by listing patches from older to newer .
You also know that this kind of serio-comic serious commentary on the plight of have-nots and the role of the artist as an outsider is a hit and miss proposition .
It is implied at the end that this woman is diabolically more than human if she can remember Lee Oswald 's recruitment and that making a patsy is a process that takes a lifetime .
It is the only career where a person is a teacher and a student at the same time and this creates sweet and interesting memories .
Which does n't make sense , because ( and I do n't think saying this is controversial ) being a rapist is a lot worse than being a homophobe , and we 're probably doing better with stamping out homophobia in sports than we are at stamping out rape culture in sports .
He did recognize that such an idea was a long shot but then again so is everything else being talked about in the Burmese case .
At a place where academic integrity is a " foundational value , " a suspension is a punishment that fits the crime , she argued .
Both an advantage and a disadvantage is the fact that the guitar lends itself to improvisation in many styles : folk , jazz , rock , blues , etc. There are sounds you can create on the guitar that standard music notation is limited to create .
A child is a terrified witness to the carnage .
SYMBOL VERSUS PlCTURE A picture is a very specific representation of what something looks like -- one thing at one time from one point of view .
A symbol is an image that represents an idea and is more general and universal than a picture .
A shape is an area that is separate from other areas and / or its background .
A line is a long thin shape .
" To which I explain , " crocheting is a skill , not a female skill , just as driving a car , mowing the lawn or cooking a meal are all skills and not limited to one gender .
This story owes a lot to Hofstadter 's wonderful and mind-bending " Godel , Escher , Bach , " which sparked the idea behind it -- can a story be the same forward and backward , and still move ?
But being a psychic is a unique career in which routine failure is simply denied or glossed over .
A baby is a baby is a baby !
They say it makes no difference : A child is a child .
I 've always thought creating flyers to advertise courses was a little sad , but at the same time , I understand that the title of a course in the catalog might not describe it accurately and that a flyer is a good way to get the word out about a class .
Taking Action How to respond to such an attack is a very difficult question .
A congress is a formal meeting of the representatives of different nations , constituent states , independent organizations , or groups .
A keyphrase is a lot more sensible because for instance , you are selling Android tablets - you 're going to use the keyword " Android tablet " instead of the root words " Android " and " tablet .
A dental professional or a dentist is a licensed practitioner who either has a dental surgery degree or doctor of dental medicine degree .
Choice way a trade-off is a huge way to discover him to are going to do stuff , a promise of caution however , keep your closing stages of the package deal or he wo n't trust you regarding this again .
A bioregion is an area that shares similar soils , climate , and plant and animal communities , they can include several watersheds .
A man suspects a plumber is the serial killer behind the grisly deaths of families around Los Angeles in this scary tale from screenwriter Les Bohem .
A galette is a rustic pie .
x Class template forward_list A forward_list is a container that supports forward iterators and allows constant time insert and erase operations anywhere within the sequence , with storage management handled automatically .
In addition , as well as functioning as an exploratory hand , the beak of a chicken is a manipulative organ .
Found in just about every shape and size , a brief is a wise and fun choice for a gift .
A triad is a closed path across three nodes .
A meteoroid is a rock , whereas a comet is more like a snowball , although most of the ice is not water ice .
What has also made an appearance is the teaming up of photographers with videographers to offer both sides of the coin in a special two in one wedding photography and video package deal .
A monsoon is a seasonal wind , found especially in Asia that reverses direction between summer and winter and often brings heavy rains .
I wanted to make one cookie without egg since halving a egg is a little difficult ;) Thanks Jenny !
" A Brooklyn-Battery crossing was needed , and if a bridge were the type of crossing were available , it would have to be a bridge .
In my mind , the most important thing about a doll is the face .
Says Voltaire , " a screenplay is a blueprint for another product , in this case a film .
Quote of my hashtagblank : A goal is a dream with a deadline .
The Pratchetts were a happy but thrifty family whose idea of a holiday was a week in Lyme Regis with friends .
Mr Warlow said paying out for a permit is no bother compared with people " abusing " his street , adding that he has fought for many years to resolve the situation .
Mr Davies said : " To say this discovery came as a surprise is an understatement - and how or why it came to end up in a hedge in Pembrokeshire is a complete mystery .
The amendment made by section 98 meant that it was much easier to register land as a TVG because a neighbourhood is a much smaller area than a locality , meaning that an application would need only to establish that a few people close by had used the land .
A.It 's -- a cult is an organization -- an organization can be large or small ; size is not the determinant -- that has expressive devotion to a leader , principle or idea .
Now , as a scientist , I have to say that the size of a city is a terrible unit of measurement .
Now , because of the Internet , everyone with a computer , an email address and a browser is a point of distribution ... the only thing needed for information to " get out " is an interest on the part of one person to supply it , and a demand on the part of another person to have it .
Second parameter to a method is the model property name , which happens to be " departments " .
An internship is a job-related experience that provides students and job changers with an opportunity to test the waters in a career field and also gain some valuable work experience .
And such a desire is neither " racist " or any other " - ist .
Needless to say , that I 'm a carrier is a little worrisome for me .
For example , the material cause of a building is the building materials of which it is constructed .
For example , the formal cause of a building is the architectural blueprints .
Should filling out an application be a stressful event ?
The scientific method may help us shake off many cultural biases ( but not all , as per Stephen Jay Gould 's The Mismeasure of Man ) but , even so , the pursuit of science by a scientist is a profoundly personal and subjective act .
A game is a voluntary interactive activity , in which one or more players follow rules that constrain their behavior , enacting an artificial conflict that ends in a quantifiable outcome .
A story is the experience of a narrative .
A blackbody is an object that absorbs all the electromagnetic energy that falls on the object , no matter what the wavelength of the radiation .
A tensiometer is the most common tool used by growers .
A tensiometer is a plastic pipe with a ceramic cup at one end and a vacuum gauge at the other .
A same-sex partner may be notified more quickly if the couple has children , because a child is the next-of-kin for a " single " service member .
VA Guaranteed Home Loan Program : Buying a home is a goal for many service members and veterans .
A complex is a series of lifts back to back where you finish the reps of one lift before moving on to the next lift .
The geographic distribution of a population is an important factor in predicting health care costs and corresponding health insurance premiums , in large part because physician payment rates vary across geographic locations .
It states that the minimal requirement for beginning a dialog is the annulment of Russia 's recognition of Abkhazia and South Ossetia and the admission of EU and OSCE observers to the republics .
A crumb is a feast in this virtual sphere !
This story of lust , greed , and deception shows the darker side of human nature , which Freud quoted as man being a wolf to his fellow man , although line 495 of Plautus more precisely means , " A man is no man , but a wolf , to a stranger .
A splitbrain is the slang term for a dual trade technician ( airfames and propulsion ) who joined under a long since dead apprenticeship scheme .
still renting it for a week is some 10 / 12 euro .
A hermaphrodite is a person who is born with either both sets of genitalia or whose genitalia have an ambiguous appearance ; they seem neither one thing nor the other .
In response to your other points : - A degree is an experience in itself and yes , most students do have part-time jobs ...
To me she is my baby but because she is a dog she has n't got the same rights as a human and I am terrified of that teacher putting in a complaint and her being muzzled or put down just for being afraid and cos some snotty kids have never been taught that screaming and provoking a dog is a sure way to scaring thepoo out of it .
But what if a school demands contributions once a child is a pupil there ?
Pushing bums down to force a sit is a physical hands on forceful method of training which generally results in the dog resisting , it can also damage a dog physically .
A car is as much of a tin to get you A 2 B as a house is a pile of bricks just for you to live in .
Thanks for all the advice , I have now decided to purchase from the UK , due to the reports from you guys about the taxation etc. Also having a warranty is a huge benefit .
A facial is the second most popular spa service after massage .
Being an airsofter is the only defence .
He is clearly fascinated by those who stayed loyal to the crown during the decades when being a roundhead was the safer option .
Dragon Yeh but ... a shag is a shag !.
Being a rapper is a career choice for me .
( 5 ) For the purposes of paragraph ( 1 ) ( i ) , the sale of tobacco products that are eligible for home use to a person who is not a manufacturer is a contravention of a requirement of duty suspension arrangements .
However , a win is a win and Angmering are nearly home and dry now whilst Southwater are doomed for relegation .
Conceeding 2 goals in a game is a rare thing to happen to Cowfold , having only conceeded 2 previously all season , so this just goes to show how potent Newtwon can be , even without the threat of Woolston up top .
For me , a blog is a way of recording my experiences and observations in Tokyo .
They make trees and then decide that species that all fit on a tree are the same " kind " .
In the end , a resume is all smoke and mirrors anyway .
A bit of a surprise was the performance of the 18 -55 mm f / 3.5 -5.6 kit lens .
Writing a grant is an instant solution to our money problems .
( define MAX-LEVEL 7 ) ; ; A color is a ( vector byte byte byte ) ; ; An octree is a : ( define-struct octree ( root ; node leaf-count ; number reduction-heads ; ( vectorof ( or / c node hashtagblank ) ) palette ) ; ( vectorof ( or / c color hashtagblank ) ) # : mutable ) ; ; reduction-heads is used to accelerate the search for a reduction candidate .
Removing a leaf is the same as picking up the top-most sticks in the Mikado stack .
I believe anyone who has been a customer is a natural marketeer ...
" It 's not often the very first person you meet in a movie is a mathematician .
A nonce is a random string , uniquely generated for each request .
Moreover , the whole charge of occupation directed at Israel as an accusation is a red herring .
CHEA recommends asking questions like the ones listed below to determine whether or not an organization is an accreditation or degree mill - offering products and services with little or no value .
Mike 's last joke reminded me of this one : a comathematician is a device for turning cotheorems into ffee .
On a related note , a comathematician is a device for turning cotheorems into ffee .
A biologist , a physicist and a mathematician were all drinking coffee and tea and observing a house across the street from them .
One of Laurence BonJour 's main arguments for the existence of the a priori is an argument that a priori justification is indispensable for making inferences from experience to conclusions that go beyond experience .
" NBG and MK formalize this nicely with the " Limitation of Size " axiom : a class is a set if and only if it is not bijective with ( i.e. " is not as big as " ) the class of all sets .
" We can scarcely doubt , therefore , " he says , " that Diodorus was describing the enamels of the Persian building , and that the white face of a woman is the same that Ctesias recognized as a portrait of Semiramis .
By addressing potential vulnerabilities at their source , the MPC & A program is a key defense against nuclear theft and terrorism and helps partners develop a robust , comprehensive , and domestically sustainable MPC & A infrastructure .
You find out whether a book is a bestseller by publishing it .
A comparison of two raw Pancam photographs from sols 3528 and 3540 of Opportunity 's mission ( a sol is a Martian day ) .
The endorsement by the CCAE does n't mean that a candidate is a liberal .
The year Romney became a conservative is the year I started this blog .
That does n't change the fact that a zygote , an fetus , an infant , and an adult are all human beings at different stages of development .
The dimension of an object is a topological measure of the size of its covering properties .
For example , a scar is a commemorative sign of a wound .
Our definition is that a component is a unit of software that is independently replaceable and upgradeable .
The key property of a component is the notion of independent replacement and upgradeability [ 13 ] - which implies we look for points where we can imagine rewriting a component without affecting its collaborators .
An oscilloscope is a must for the checks .
No A website is a marketing tool - it it helps hake it a good one - if it is not needed why pay more for your goods keeping a business overhead that adds little value !!
Didnt say that I wouldnt , just said that its not a barrier to being successful in business and these days the train of thought for far too many is that having a website is a precursor to riches , it isnt !
Lynton as a father is a remote disciplinarian and breadwinner who spends little time with his children while his wife looks after the house , organises the family and keeps things as calm and peaceful as possible .
It 's a shame-it 's a natural way for human beings to express the emotional breaks in their lives .
When I moved from American to London 4 years ago , a bicycle was the first thing I bought - even before sorting out a permanent place to live !
Definition : A vigilante is a person who ignores due process of law and enacts his own form of justice when he deems the response of the authorities to be insufficient .
With any merc an auto is a must ...
In a simple explanation , a heatspreader is an external cover for memory modules to help dissipate heat .
Not a mechanic Is this correct ?
In order to defend against an allegation of defamation you have to establish that a statement is both true and fair comment on a matter of public interest ( NOT just ' of interest to the public ' but important for the public to know ) .
This theory , called the caloric theory , was based on two axioms , namely that the heat in the universe is conserved and that the heat in a substance is a function of the state of the substance .
We are talking here about a secondary issue-in this case , legal aid-that arises indirectly from a person being a victim of domestic violence , not a decision that directly relates to someone 's protection , such as in an immigration context or an injunction application .
A garden is an amazing study of life itself .
In some cases a lawn is a luxurious waste of space and water , and it yields little in return for all the time and energy you spend mowing , fertilizing , aerating , watering , raking , and picking up dog poop .
A bonus was the relatively low cost .
IMX , an infallible sign of a bubble is the phrase , " This time it 's different .
If we thought that the underlying driver of the value of a stock was the price we could sell it for in the future , and not the earnings we 'd receive , then there would be no firm basis for pricing stocks well .
First a quick review : a queue is a FIFO data structure ; the first thing added to the queue will be the first thing removed from the queue , just like people waiting in a line ( or a queue , for that matter ) .
If the scientists have proven that a molecule is an aggregate of myriads of atoms and the atom in turn is an aggregate of infinite electrons , how can the sun be comprehended ?
A cat-eye is a daily must for me , and I 've written before about the ways that eyeliner can be used to alter eye shape , even out uneven eyes , and generally just make eyes look great .
Even my much-vaunted half a novel was half assemblage , scraps , un-permissioned quotes , pages and pages of them ; it was simply not possible to do what I was trying to do as straight linear narrative .
An armadillo is an animal !
Living in a dorm is an important part of your first year at UT Austin because it is a great opportunity to meet other freshmen who might share your interests .
When it comes to saving time , a bike is the best investment you can make .
What a connection and what an agreement is this !
Plus , based on what I 'm reading from other posters here , Christie may not be a reliable 2nd Amendment supporter so a commutation was a safer bet .
To them , a pacifist is the same as being a traitor .
When Rush says that a Pacifist is a supporter of the Terrorist for not endorsing the mission of ' Infinite Justice ' , he does not deserve any ' dittos ' .
To watch a master a work is a pleasure .
there 's nothing exciting about a hot dog , no matter how you dress it up $ 8 for a " gourmet " hot dog , tator tots and a coke is a bit extreme .
Subject to the Indian Act Transition Chapter and paragraphs 5 and 6 of the Taxation Chapter , the Indian Act has no application to the Nisga ' a Nation , Nisga ' a Villages , Nisga ' a Institutions , or Nisga ' a citizens as of the effective date , except for the purpose of determining whether an individual is an " Indian " .
A proxy is a sort of trope .
A persona is a proxy .
On a flyleaf is a list of contents in Montagu 's hand .
But a paycheck 's a paycheck .
A caption is a paragraph beginning with the string ( or just ) , which will be stripped off .
An example is the proposal for Harriet Tubman National Historical Park , he said .
For JOI , outreach is more than a verb-it 's a methodology .
Even if it 's a ridiculous fiction that has contributed to my hurting I like it , because I write for sensation , and such a style is all about channeling those thundery energies through the power of a body .
I think the " disguise " of a platformer was a bit too good in this case , as I felt the exact same rage I feel at frustrating platform games .
A place is an area within an environment that has been altered in such a way as the make the general environment more conspicuous .
If A is X , the statue of Mussolini is the state ; the Monument to the Third International is history ; a cube is the crystallization of a state of mind .
It could be defined by Carl Andre 's motto - ' A thing is a hole in a thing that is not .
' One gets the sense that ' nouning , ' which transforms a noun into a participle , is a play on Cage-ian empty mind practice , one that is intent on letting things come to one as themselves , literally becoming themselves within the particular context created by the observer 's perspective , and on ' crying , ' as a cry is the ultimate non-nounal noun , a signifier without referent .
A blog is the perfect place to play around for the sake of it .
Ziggy : Frankly , I 'm more disturbed by the fact that mice would see him as a cook and a butler-this is the kind of punchline you 'd expect from a domesticated animal .
If a woman is the boss of a bank , it 's a weird bank .
Looking at my map on the way back to Flores , I realise that what you see on a tour is a fraction of the city ( the scale of the place is overwhelming ) ; and the only thing I 'm disappointed by is the fact that there 's still so much I did n't see .
Unless they are dry aging the steaks in-house , I think a steak is the most overpriced meal you can get in the city .
So , for example , if we say something like : We can understand why reasonable people could advocate a boycott of products made in Israeli settlements in the West Bank because those settlements are deemed illegal under international law and because a boycott is a peaceful way of expressing a moral concern - well , if we say something like that , we could be sued and held liable in civil court .
A havurah is a lay-lead Jewish group that meets to study , pray , dance , and participate in social action activities-or do whatever else its members are interested in doing .
A bodgie was a Australian version of the 1950 s English Teddy Boy and Hawke 's thick grey-black coiffure added inches to his abbreviated stature .
Aside from the reimbursing cash to customers for a robbery is a safety issue , not a monetary policy .
Such a compromise is an absolute must if Israel is to get the buffer 242 calls for in order to create more secure , defensible , and real borders to replace what have come to be known as the " Auschwitz Lines .
Ordinarily , according to the little that I know of literature , a drama is a suite of actions , speeches , movements which hurry to a catastrophe ; but what I speak of was a catastrophe in action .
" If guns became a disease factor , then whoever possesses a gun is a carrier of a disease-causing agent .
" In other words , being in the physical vicinity of a firearm is the equivalent of being near a person with small pox or influenza .
Ash 's mass swearing proved one point that the real enemy of a woman is another woman .
La Zambinella displayed in her single person , intensely alive and delicate beyond words , all those exquisite proportions of the female form which he had so ardently longed to behold , and of which a sculptor is the most severe and at the same time the most passionate judge .
' said Sarrasine , ' to stimulate a passion is a poor way to extinguish it !
" A penumbra is an uncomfortable touchstone for constitutional rights .
" Sometimes , in the morning , the Count took exercise in his garden , to and fro , like a man to whom a walk is the hippogryph ridden by dreamy melancholy .
Maurice , an indiscriminating passion in a husband is a mistake that may lead to any crime in a wife .
" " ' What a dagger-stroke was this to a man who found inexhaustible pleasure in the trickery by which he gets the finest Lyons velvet at twelve francs a yard , a pheasant , a fish , a dish of fruit , for a tenth of their value , for a woman so ignorant as to believe that she is paying ample wages with two hundred and fifty francs to Madame Gobain , a cook fit for a bishop .
My heart is breaking for Sklyar and I believe that this representation of a female is a writing triumph , even if she is not rising up like some feminist superhero and slaying the vampire - er , dragon .
An infestation is a large group .
All of this leads me to conclude that Heathcliff as a strip is the first in a trilogy of single-panel funnies that , taken together , depict the rise , peak , and eventual decline of homo animalia .
A stricture is a narrowing or closure of a tube .
A catheter is a thin , flexible tube that can be guided into openings of the body .
But it 's not so fun when a woman is the object .
Rigging it to auto-delete critical stuff upon a breakin is an option .
Such an approach is an attempt to reverse the burden of proof , and the purveyors of such untested hypotheses should not be so easily allowed to get away with such assaults against reason .
There 's a difference between an experience and a concept - a nightmare is an experience .
This is a clutch is a great choice for bookworms , with ...
A third is a specific issue with American hegemony , which I think often creeps into anti-Americanism more generally , because it 's a hard idea to comprehend for many who might be feeling it .
A douche is a device used to introduce a stream of water into the body for medical or hygienic reasons .
Being a parent is a difficult thing , if you 're doing it right .
One of the most striking things I noticed on becoming a parent is that everyone -- everyone -- has an opinion on how best to raise your kids .
" Perhaps the best explanation of why North America is not such a diaspora is the March 18 , 2002 letter by Patriarch Alexis of Russia to Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew .
When this happens I sometimes think that the attachment to truth that has been burned into my virgin neural circuits as a child is a handicap that I would have been better off without .
A zawiyya is a nest for the development of love of Allah , a place for the attainment of every desire and an anchorage for all good , both in the sensory and the meaning .
A polyhedron is any closed solid shape consisting of four or more polygon-shaped faces in which pairs of polygon faces join along edges and three or more edges meet at a vertex .
He for whom they are a reward is a man who tethers them in the way of Allah giving them a long tether in a pasture or meadow .
A man is a shepherd in his family and is responsible for those in his care .
" He said , " I heard this from the Messenger of Allah , may Allah bless him and grant him peace , and I think that he also said , ' A man is a shepherd of his father 's property and is responsible for what is in his care .
We explained that if a visit was the result of them either breaking or misusing the system they would be liable for all costs , this they agreed .
" That day a hug was the cure to my fear .
A divorce is a very personal thing ; something that makes your health and possible - familial bliss regained .
A highlight is the mosaic of marine biodiversity that radiates outward from a spectacular Gorgonocephalus .
Only a good leader with the above characteristics will save us from disintegrating , because poverty is at the worse stage , to eat three times a day is a burden to many .
Recommending a novel is a big deal ( writes Kevin Williamson ) .
( 3 ) If a transaction is an avoidance transaction , the director may determine the tax consequences to a person in a manner that is reasonable in the circumstances in order to deny a tax benefit that , but for this section , would result , directly or indirectly , from that transaction or from a series of transactions that includes that transaction .
Well , an otoneurologist is a neurologist who specializes in the inner ear , or more specifically the vestibular or balance system .
The most prominent national payment policy so far that has its roots in a demo is the hospital diagnosis-related group system , said Stuart Guterman , PhD , a health policy analyst at the Commonwealth Fund , a progressive think tank in Washington .
Ibn ' Abbas said , " I think that answering a letter is a duty , just like returning the greeting .
' ' Abdullah said , ' I heard the Messenger of Allah , may Allah bless him and grant him peace , say , " A Muslim is the one from whose tongue and hand the Muslims are safe .
Some of my deficiencies as a scientist are no doubt attributable to nurture : too many years spent in schools staffed by bunglers like Mr .
The marriage relationship between a man and a woman is a gift from God .
Going for a dump was a daily highlight and something to look forward to .
But an earthquake is a rather short-lived event .
An example is the restless title track , with an unpredictably fluctuating tempo .
A ' Flyer ' is just another name for an advertising poster on usually printed on a a sheet of A 5 Not in this case , a flyer is an extra tournament within an ongoing tournament , generally at the end of a day or if players are waiting around to keep them interested , in this case , we 're putting up £ 200 for anyone to enter , just to kick the tournament off really .
Not in this case , a flyer is an extra tournament within an ongoing tournament , generally at the end of a day or if players are waiting around to keep them interested , in this case , we 're putting up £ 200 for anyone to enter , just to kick the tournament off really .
Menon , in her bid to contextualise and historicize the discussion of Indian writing in English , began by observing that , in her view : ' The book trade in India as a whole is a very depressed trade ' .
I had always thought of mathematics as being much more straightforward : a formula is a formula , and an algebra is an algebra , but Gelfand found hedgehogs lurking in the rows of his spectral sequences !
In static binding , the scope of a variable is the procedure in which it is declared and any procedures declared locally inside this .
i think that we both learned something from this and everything happens for a reason ... and now i just need a prayer that what she tells me about wanting me and wanting us to be happy as a family is the truth ... alls i want is the truth ... i know my wife ... well i thought ... but again ... thats where the ' for granted ' part comes in again ... i guess i need answers ...?? god i pray to you in heaven that you will touch our hearts and send a angel to be by our sides and help us work through this .. if anyone has any thoughts or any advice ... please reply ... and keep us in your prayers .. she has told me everything .. from the sex part of her affair to etc. .
Are you going to say that because of that , a turbo is a back step from an N / A engine ?
That is why a referendum is the only democratic mechanism to pooling democracy .
I definitely am not saying this should be a habit , but sex with a woman is a much larger thing than releasing a tension so that you can at least feel normal and are not tempted to sin with a woman , especially in countries where women roam freely .
A bike is a vehicle of sorts , it can cause damage to pedestrians and the rider .
Massage : Whether you use the cash you 've saved so far to splash out on a professional massage at a health spa , or you rope your partner in , a massage is a great way to release tension .
Saving in a pension is a mugs game .
Ten years ago , burning a CD was a tedious process that required three hours of time and a blank disc that ran you $ 2 a piece .
Registering a control is a very simple process actually and can be done using RUN from the Start menu .
On the road to the peninsula of Deerness is Dingieshowe , a sandy isthmus where a mound is the site of a Viking parliament , known as a ting .
Harassment by a landlord is a criminal offence .
An illegal eviction by a landlord is a criminal offence .
The only vehicle we know that is completely legal to tow with an A-frame is the French Aixam small " car " .
Note that the argument is not about whether the quality represented in the species resembles the quality in the object , but about whether a species is the same kind of thing as the object which gave rise to it ( as it would be if it were an outer surface which had evaporated off ) .
Adopting the definitions of the OED we can say that a curator is the custodian of a collection which can be described as a group of things collected together .
I reckon this will be routine rather than spectacular , but a win is a win .
MacRitchie worked out his ideas with infectious enthusiasm ; fairies who enter a houses through a chimney are a misunderstanding of primitive Picts swarming in and out of their houses through the smokehole , and so on .
Obviously striking , pushing or restraining a client are the most obvious forms of physical abuse .
" Who is Lord of life and death : for He it is Who inflicts the punishment of death on all men , both godly and ungodly , on account of the sin of our first parent , and if a man be the executor of that sentence by Divine authority , he will be no murderer any more than God would be .
In other words , for Andrew , because God 's absolute power determines whether a homicide is a sin , Abraham would not have sinned and so would have done no wrong if he had killed Isaac in obedience to the divine command .
And what makes love of neighbor a duty is a divine command .
A router is a tool used to engrave lines or hollow out areas in the face of sheet materials , and is commonly used in CNC machines .
A mentor is a person who cares about you and goes out of her way to see that you get the best possible chance to fulfill your career potential .
A conversation is a two way thing , so be sure to also respond to your followers / fans / connections when they ask questions , and try to follow up with discussions - if you ask what colour baseball cap your contacts like best , when somebody replies " blue " try asking them why .
" I mean , to think she had to put her life at risk by jumping in a canal just to escape an attacker is a horrible thing to imagine .
The + terminal of a battery is a location with a higher electric potential than the - terminal of a battery .
FALSE - The rate at which charge flows past a point is the current .
TRUE - The resistance of a resistor is the V / I ratio at that location .
FALSE - The resistance of a resistor is the V / I ratio at that location .
FALSE - A kiloWatt is a unit of power .
An hour is a unit of time .
But embellishment of a quality is the opposite of what happened here .
The extra fraction of a second was the difference between the runner at the plate ( lumbering Rays catcher Kelly Shoppach ) being safe and out on the fielder 's choice grounder .
Storytron is a technology for interactive storytelling ; a story is the consequence of a single playing of the Balance of Power storyworld .
A career as a musicologist is a lifetime devoted to the study and understanding of music , applied to serve the varied needs of multiple clients .
In other words , the accessible symbols in a package are those that can be referred to with unqualified names when the package is current .
The type of a link referencing instances of a class is a subtype of superclass link types .
Pauly and Change and I went to the diner we visted a number of times last year-the service tonight was problematic , it took use 15 minutes to get a glass of water , an hour for our food , but my burger was pretty good and just having an appetite is a plus these days .
His group , after all , believes that killing an animal is an outrage , while killing a person is no big deal .
TV Guide Magazine : So you do n't think a mausoleum is an unusual place to do it ?
Using a CD is a smart way to turn money you know you wonât be spending for a while into a little extra interest , but may not be the best place for an emergency fund where the need for that money could arise at any time .
He got 3 runs in 2 losses ... a win is a win .
A Barcamp is a sort of " unconference " ( BAR = " Beyond All Recognition " ) : It is organized and administered not by an institution or a company , but by an open community of interested individuals .
Fluid movement of a character is a vital element in creating a dynamic game-play ...
Eh , even if he does n't lift a finger again for the rest of his life , creating one massively successful , revolutionary , paradigm-shifting , household-name game in a lifetime is a decent achievement .
You might find this definition in the dictionary , but my guess is that you 'll find something more like this : " A diet is the eating habits one adopts when one 's ordinary eating habits get out of hand .
But as someone else said in the comments , Jade as a character is the best female lead in a video game ... well , pretty much ever .
The epicenter of an earthquake is the point on the ground directly above the focus .
An iPhone or an iPad is a multi-use device .
How a person is the same and how he has changed , that 's what occupies my movie .
A taxonomy is a system that groups and orders concepts or things , such as the classifications in biology that include family , genus and species .
An earthquake is a serious matter , productive of results very painful to contemplate .
It is difficult to tell though because a decade is a long time , and I do n't see it happening in the next 1 to 2 years , but it is possible .
The truth is everyone needs to know that those I 'm having a go at are not the friends of sea angling ; trouble is they think they are and that in a nutshell is the problem .
A literal is an explicit numeric , character , string , or Boolean value not represented by an identifier .
The Library holds around 350 items on the subject of phrenology - the belief derived from the theories of Franz Josef Gall ( 1758 -1828 ) that the mental faculties are located in various parts or ' organs ' of the brain , and investigable by feeling the surface of the skull , with the size of an organ being an indication of its power .
A bicycle is a vehicle , but it is not a motor vehicle .
An example is the paper 's report of 10 May that at Guy Motors a secret ballot in the presence of two trade union officials had given a 75 per cent vote in favour of a return to work .
- An organism is a heterozygote or is heterozygous at a locus or gene when it has different alleles occupying the gene 's position in each of the homologous chromosomes .
Now it has been said " A week is a long time in politics " , Just days after the latest summit , the wheels are falling off .
But a lie is a lie is a lie .
To repeat a miracle is a hopeless duty , But it rains nearly every fortnight .
A number of the initial stages of an investigation are the same as those taken by UK agencies , such as considering the use of covert surveillance before deciding what searches are necessary and whether to make any arrests .
Originally , a geek was a carnival performer who bit the heads off chickens .
The second novel in a series is a tough test ; this week reveals two British crime writers who have overcome the hurdle with honour .
' A cohort was a tenth part of a legion compromising between three hundred and six hundred infantry .
But a week is a long time in Politics : currently opinion poll data indicate that Labour support among C 2 voters has increased thereby increasing the overall social class basis of voter support since the 2010 General Election .
A condition is any variable or expression that returns a value .
A selector is an expression whose value is used to select one of several alternatives .
( In a nicely wry touch , Hrauna notes that having a queen is an import from Norway , which once ruled Iceland , and that a republic would be more appropriate .
More important , such a warning is an absolute prerequisite in overcoming the inherent pressures of the interrogation atmosphere .
Assessments of the knowledge the defendant possessed , based on information [ 384 U.S. 469 ] as to his age , education , intelligence , or prior contact with authorities , can never be more than speculation ;{ GO " 38 } a warning is a clear-cut fact .
{ 39 } Although the role of counsel at trial differs from the role during interrogation , the differences are not relevant to the question whether a request is a prerequisite .
It is true that the fact of a prisoner 's being in custody at the time he makes a confession is a circumstance not to be overlooked , because it bears upon the inquiry whether the confession was voluntarily made or was extorted by threats or violence or made under the influence of fear .
The reason given is that assessment of the knowledge of the defendant based on information as to age , education , intelligence , or prior contact with authorities can never be more than speculation , while a warning is a clear-cut fact .
As I mentioned above , putting your plant lights on a timer is the safest way to go .
So something that shortens the lives of 3,000 Americans a year is a massive public health threat , while something that prematurely knocks off 60 million Americans is n't worth breaking a sweat .
( An isotope is a variation of an element that is heavier or lighter than the standard form of the element because each atom has more or fewer neutrons in its nucleus . ) But what were the ingredients in the original solar nebula ?
They have a nice short example of code , and mappings of XMLRPC types to Java types ( eg a struct is a Hashtable ) .
We have a team of professional designers , who can take your imaginations and needs in their mind , while they design your website , as a website is the brand ambassador of your company , which speak on behalf of you .
As a graphical representation of yourself , an avatar is a cartoon image , which can be used as the profile picture of your twitter , blog , forum or some other social accounts .
A clothoid is a section of a spiral in which the radius is constantly changing .
A cookie is a small amount of data that is sent to your browser from a web server and stored on your computer 's hard drive .
A slice is the highest level of organization on a hard disk .
A patent is an exclusive right granted by the government that permits the holder to stop others from doing certain things .
But a nerd is a nerd and there 's no getting around that , he said .
So checking your report at least once a year is a good way to make sure nothing fishy is showing up .
The first composition that had a title was an Irish tune that was a compilation various instruments , formatted on the keyboard as a piece .
A specialist solicitor was mentioned here , but I think a ramp is a very mundane issue and anyone can do it , Probably .
A world is a physical planet while a realm is a region ruled by a sovereign .
A tachyon is a particle that is not at rest in any timelike frame .
Lawrence , A bradyon is a particle that moves slower than c , pretty much everything we 've measured .
I was under the impression that a tachyon was any particle that could move faster than the speed of light ; whether that is infinite m / s or 2 c ( twice speed of light ) .
In the winter of 479 B.C. , a tsunami was the savior of Potidaea , drowning hundreds of Persian invaders as they lay siege to the ancient Greek village .
A highlight was the development and management of Ask Bristol online community engagement websites as well as Bristol 's community-led issues forums .
" A calorie is a calorie , " he added .
[ 52 ] Even when they do know their rights , registering a farm is a complex administrative process .
Arbitration and / or taking it to court as an individual are the words now .
Reading a map is all good and well for saying where you are , working out a safe route away but if you lose conciseness at least after the call is made they know where you are !
The kind of " care " offered in a crisis is the opposite of what vulnerable people need and would wish for. How does it improve someone 's mental health when the police break their door down and drag them off to " hospital " in handcuffs ?
The capacity of a school is the number of pupil places available .
An email is a permanent record and can be easily forwarded to others or intercepted .
A signature is a short piece of text added to the foot your emails usually containing contact details about yourself .
An example is a telephone call .
The Church A church is a building where Christians worship .
The Cathedral A cathedral is the main church in an area , called a diocese , that is looked after by a bishop .
Returning to work when you 're a mum is a balancing act that may take a while to perfect .
Wecht , given the nature of his wounds , how much prior to the time that he manifests a reaction is the earliest he could have been struck ?
As the ride surges on mercilessly , the operators maintain the party atmosphere with the usual fairground tricks of urging you to scream , wave your arms and legs , and play endless jingles ( a favourite being a blast of Queen 's " We Will Rock You " , which makes you regret not having a floor to stamp your feet upon ) .
A nightmare is a particularly vivid dream that is unpleasant , frightening or unsettling .
As hard as it is to imagine now , an inversion was a great innovation back then .
All you need to host a party is a downstairs toilet , easy access to your home and a large teapot !
I saw a FIERCE woman of God full of passion and preached like fire YET still had her femininity and was very much a woman being a woman not trying to be like a man - if that makes any sense !
An abscess is a collection of pus in any part of the body that , in most cases , causes swelling and inflammation around it .
The only recorded fatality from a meteor was an Egyptian dog that had the bad luck to be in the wrong place at the wrong time in 1911 .
- Every mean is inferior to its complete , adequate , and whole end ; and such an end is the whole kingdom in relation to the king ; but every mean is not always inferior to its incomplete , inadequate , and partial end .
A tumor is an abnormal growth of body tissue .
A seizure is the physical findings or changes in behavior that occur after an episode of abnormal electrical activity in the brain .
Certainly , a king being a sinful man , and having no restraint on his power but reason , he may think it reason to allow rebels to kill , drown , hang , torture to death , an hundred thousand protestants , men , women , infants in the womb , and sucking babes , as is clear in Pharaoh , Manaseh , and other princes .
" And God 's end in giving a king is the good and safety of his people .
No , the only person who got a horoscope was the King or the ruler of the county .
A website is a part of your monthly and yearly marketing budget .
Nay , give me leave to doubt if Omnipotence can make a just law to have an unjust and bloody sense , aut contra , because it involveth a contradiction ; - the true meaning of a law being the essential form of the law .
While the segment focuses on financial resolutions , it smartly includes career resolutions , as your ability to earn a salary or launch and grow a business is a major financial asset .
A paleosol is a layer of ancient soil , in this case buried and preserved where it formed .
The infinitive of a verb is that part which expresses the meaning alone , for example , " to go , " " to sing , " " to be .
A bus is a path on the motherboard that connects the CPU to the CD-ROM drive , hard drive and other attachments .
The central government was also local ; the chief government official responsible for a county was a magistrate , selected from a central pool on the basis of his performance in the examinations and assigned to a specific county where he had no prior family connections .
A job 's a job .
Often a tour is a combination of in-person meetings with press and analysts in multiple metro areas ( New York , Boston , Washington , DC , Chicago , San Francisco / Silicon Valley ) and teleconferences .
The comparison to a volcano is the point of my 2003 poster The North Tower Eruption .
A government is the body that has the power to make and enforce laws within an organization or group .
As the occurrence of an eclipse is a natural phenomenon , to mention eclipses as signs must indicate that they will have a special significance in the advent of the Mahdi of the latter days .
It 's the reason nearly every site that comes out for a movie is a one hundred percent flash based site that requires me to learn some new type of navigational scheme for each one .
The only reputable museum that would show such an exhibit is the Museum of Hoaxes .
In the world of statistics , an outlier is an observation that does not comply with the rest of the averages , and has been removed for the sake of consistency .
Second , when the Letourneau-Allard and Navarre plans were finally prepared ( in 1953 , three years after the U.S. decided that a plan was a necessary precondition for aid ) , some U.S. observers realized that these were more concepts than plans .
Lesson : I 'm never complaining about xcode again - even in iOS 2.0 when the AppStore launched , I was able to just download and install xcode and start making an iPhone app with the simulator ( although getting it onto a device was all sorts of pain ) .
An Ethiopian proverb says : " A woman without a donkey is a donkey herself .
The members of a company are the subscribers to the company 's memorandum ( who are deemed to have agreed to become members ) and all other persons who have agreed to become members of the company .
( The officers claimed they also had additional intelligence from the Home Office that two Ghanaian nationals , refused leave to enter the UK , were also living at the address . ) This rule basically allows immigration officers to go on ' fishing raids ' if they have what they consider to be ' reasonable grounds ' - to suspect that a person is an immigration offender .
Although the dream of a clinic is some way away , in the meantime the most important piece of advice I have gleaned is that we all must ' Take it easier ' and ' If it hurts stop doing it ' .
I think IFAs have traditionally thought of themselves as distributors of products but I am no more of a distributor for an insurance company than a doctor is a distributor of drugs .
" A film is an act .
My favourite bit as a child was the " dummy keyboard " - Cooper would play some bit of classical stuff on a silent keyboard , and they 'd have to work out the tune from how his fingers moved .
My personal favourite chapter is the fourth , where Mary Cronk explores the concept that a midwife is a professional servant , employed by the woman ( either directly or indirectly ) to care for her .
Mary asks us to remember that anyone providing a ser vice is a servant , that a midwife has a profession , and that therefore a midwife is a professional servant , like it or not .
A character is a representation of a human being , with her own mood , personality and character .
The amplitude of a wave is the height of the wave from the middle to a peak or trough .
( The displacement of a particle is the distance a particle moves from the centre .
The time period of a wave is the time it takes for one complete wave .
The frequency of a wave is the number of waves that travels past a point in one second .
An atheroma is a build up of cholesterol , fibres , dead muscle cells and platelets and is more likely to develop upon damage to the artery wall by high blood pressure , carbon monoxide or nicotine .
A more intense approach would get quicker results but four or five times a week is the maximum recommended frequency .
In the simplest terms a forum is a website that that you , the user , can interact with by asking or answering questions , stating opinions or otherwise contributing to ongoing discussions .
A wildwood is a repository of the excellence of wild nature that we can observe and seek inspiration from , but from which we take nothing away except our enjoyment .
Viewing a video is a passive activity .
The downloadable Q & A document is a compilation of the main questions DuPont has received so far and which summarizes the position DuPont is currently developing to prepare for the implementation of REACH .
A length of a horse is the distance from the nose to the tail .
Keith Gulliver ( KG ) : A recession is a disruption to any market .
We might therefore try to tighten the definition by saying that a miracle is an event that exceeds the productive power of nature St. Thomas Aquinas , SCG 3.103 ; ST 1.110 , art 4 ) , where " nature " is construed broadly enough to include ourselves and any other creatures substantially like ourselves .
Variations on this include the idea that a miracle is an event that would have happened only given the intervention of an agent not wholly bound by nature ( Larmer 1988 : 9 ) and that a miracle is an event that would have happened only if there were a violation of the causal closure of the physical world .
A miracle is an event that exceeds the productive power of nature , and a religiously significant miracle is a detectable miracle that has a supernatural cause .
A miracle is a violation of the laws of nature .
A miracle is the violation of mathematical , divine , immutable , eternal laws .
By the very exposition itself , a miracle is a contradiction in terms : a law cannot at the same time be immutable and violated .
Proportioning belief to evidence , therefore , it is more reasonable to believe that the claim that an event is a miracle is mistaken than it is that the event is a violation of natural law .
Doing it one smell at a time is a good way of gradually teaching people on the team to be better programmers .
A hyperlink is a predefined link between two documents .
A rule is a statement about one stylistic aspect of one or more elements .
However , there is a difference of eleven days between the Hijri calendar and the Gregorian calendar , in which a year is the time it takes the Earth to orbit the Sun .
My dictionary says a resident is a person who lives somewhere permanently or on a long term basis .
A bug that allows remote code execution or even a DoS is a much , much bigger issues than fixing the user experience or minor stability issues .
A bug that allows remote code execution or even a DoS is a much , > much bigger issues than fixing the user experience or minor stability issues .
A bug is a bug .
A physicist is an atom 's way of knowing about atoms .
Structural engineering claims that the weight-supporting properties of a bridge are a function of its physical constitution -- the materials involved and their configuration .
Facts about Varicocele A varicocele is a collection of enlarged , varicose veins that develops in the spermatic cord .
One of the features I like quite a bit is the Google voice search capability in general and on Maps .
For example , finding a word accepted by an automaton is a task that is sometimes given to students e.g. prove that the following language is non-empty ) .
Now I try to only drink one or two nights a week , and not to carry it into drinks while watching TV after dinner , etc. Prudie did n't say it , but three glasses a night is a lot of wine , and it 's worth cutting back for a lot of reasons , not least because your drinking is hurting your relationship with someone you care about .
Usually a technocrat is an ex-politician or a civil servant .
If a song is that huge , we 'd rest it and bring it back in a year in a lesser played gold category .
A life is a life , be it that of a uniformed officer or a civilian , so there is no reason for President Waheed and his cabinet to act like the life lost of a police officer is more valuable than that of any other innocent person .
A Bloom filter is a clever data structure that lets you check if an element is a member of a set , while storing much less data than the entire set .
Choosing a lens is a creative decision : a short focal length " allows " us a viewpoint that produces perspective distortion ( if you want it ) .
For musicians , a gig is a gig .
How about : A standard is a set of characteristics that everybody tries to implement in order to be standard compliant .
A nebulizer is a device that delivers aerosolized liquid medicine deep into the lungs .
In an IRC chat room , the anonymous chat room makes it easy for people to lie , and many do -- but in that context a lie is a lie .
' People who use computers to communicate , form friendships that sometimes form the basis of communities , but you have to be careful to not mistake the tool for the task and think that just writing words on a screen is the same thing as real community .
In another ( unrelated ) project I 've done a consistent job of creating mock interfaces for disk accesses to make testing easier and I 've found that needing to pass in an extra to a function is a great way of the compiler helping you know whether a given call may touch the disk or not .
A : A map is a picture , or visual representation , showing places and their relationships to each other .
A : An atlas is a collection of maps , usually published in book form but sometimes online .
When an Apology Sets the Tone of a Dispute in Mediation ( 5 / 23 / 14 ) Jacques Joubert For commercial mediators it is obvious that commercial interests such as the need to make a profit are the most important incentives for the parties to settle , in the context of course of their legal rights .
A subject is the running process , the thing that is trying to do the access .
The closest we get to a clunker is a Beach Boys track .
Affordable health insurance - individual family and self-employed Affordable health insurance - individual family and self-employed " The heart of a mother is a deep abyss at the bottom of which you will always find forgiveness .
A bobbin is a bobbin ; the important bit is the clip and the Muddy Waters Kippa clips are good .
An aircraftsman is the RAF title for the equivalent of a lance coporal in the army .
How to stretch a tyre is an art - you have to know how to do it - I 've mainly seen Yoko 's and Toyo 's done - and they stretch well .
Finally , you need a target - 40 calls a day is a good start - 2 appointments a day is a better one !
Maybe the mum who did n't see her kids for a week is a better mother than me in other ways .
right chaps , I 've been thinking of getting a baiting spoon with a 12 m baiting pole for some of the smaller lakes I fish so i can get tight to the island etc. I was looking for a review from someone who has used them as £ 100 for a pole is a bit of cash i might not really want to spend .
Taking a drink before a meal is a great way to refresh the palate , stimulate the appetite and slip into pleasure mode .
Becoming a landlord is an excellent way to earn a decent return on your investment-once the mortgage is paid in full , all of the income associated with the property you let will be profit ; less tax and the cost of property maintenance of course .
Certain individuals born outside of the United States are born citizens because of their parents , according to the principle of jus sanguinis ( which holds that the country of citizenship of a child is the same as that of his / her parents ) .
( D ) A flip-flop is a sort of sandal that flips and flops .
If one knows little about particle physics , one can make ( at least ) the following deductions , wherein one recalls the composites of each particle : ( A ) A muon is a lepton .
( Contribution to this part of the solution is due to user danty . ) Moreover , a pi-meson is a hadron .
The only way to identify the ingredients actually used in a paint is a chemical deformulation analysis , which can run upwards of $ 1000 for a single sample .
( The Grammar Police have asked me to explain that a pallet is a shipping platform or a humble bed ; a palate is the roof of a mouth ; a palette is the flat implement used to hold and mix paints and the selection of paint colors or the color scheme used by the painter .
A gradient is a continuous change across spatial distance from one distinct visual quality to another .
An object is a visual area identified as a physical form .
A pattern is a texture of repeating areas , forms or objects .
A grouping is an aggregation of forms or objects in a pattern of visual precedence or order ; a clutter is an aggregation of many forms or objects without apparent precedence or order .
Potatoes in jackets for luncheon , mashed for dinner a masher was a fashionable young man of the Edwardian era .
Another factor contributing to Motola 's success as an athlete is the close and positive relationship with her coach , Mr .
( The independence number of a graph is the largest possible number of vertices you can find such that no two are joined , so this is equivalent to saying that you cannot find graphs in the corresponding nested sequence without two of them differing by a clique .
Writing fiction requires the author to pull out big bloody chunks of his / her psyche and shape them into something presentable to the public at large , and that 's not a job for the typical computer programmer or waitress who assumes that coming up with an idea is all it takes to become successful .
In our music industry which saw 42 million attendances ( outside major ticketed events ) , where $ 1.2 billion was spent , the normal annual wage for a musician is a mere $ 8,100 .
For these men and women , being a carpenter is a profession they are proud to do their entire lives and pass down from one generation to the next .
One staff member , when we were discussing how practicing artists often need " day jobs " in the United States , responded passionately , " Being an artist is a professional occupation .
" The most solid advice for a writer is this , I think : Try to learn to breathe deeply , really to taste food when you eat , and when you sleep really to sleep .
A stop is a knob on the organ console ( where the organist sits ) that stops and unstops the air from entering a rank of pipes .
An allergy is an immune response - when the body senses that a harmful substance has entered it , and releases specific chemicals to combat the perceived threat .
Throwing a football is a little more tactical than it looks .
A dipole is a particular machine for creating EM fields .
A globalist is a person who believes that most human activities are more and more extensive geographically and culturally and that this trend should be used to advantage , personal , corporate , institutional and national .
Generically speaking , a node is a specialized object in the media system that processes buffers of media data .
A media_node is a structure that an application uses when working with media nodes ; interactions with the Media Roster are almost always done using this structure instead of an object actually derived from .
A sample is a single value that defines the amplitude of an audio waveform at a given instant in time .
A frame is the set of samples that describes a sound at a given instant in time .
A buffer is a more efficient way of sending audio from one node to another .
I came away with the strong impression that a photograph is the value guide Jackson is most comfortable working with .
So it really does n't matter which gender it 's marketed to - a razor is a razor .
' And you know that an aggregation is a compilation of varying items , substances , pieces , components , different objects or things that are put together in one collection .
' A kingdom is a hierarchical organization of many components , many pieces , and the body is just that .
" If you are familiar with meteorology or earth science , you know that an aggregate is a collection of different materials , like sand , gravel , and rock of varying densities , weight and mass .
Being a vegetarian is a very beautiful ideal with many benefits , but some people make an " I " out of it .
We will , however , use lists to represent complex terms , with the first element of a list being the function symbol and the subsequent elements the arguments , in order .
The earliest Honeycombe of whom we have a record was a serf .
So a deacon is a servant of the church .
A win 's a win !
The problem with such a proposition is the tendency to conflate the recognition of Goto 's use of re-enacted compositional set pieces , lifted from the repertoire of art history , with the operation of more refined faculties of discrimination and by implication , the interpretive power this has to impart greater moral , ethical or cultural value to the reading of the scene .
Certainly there is a scattered network or rather networks of birders throughout Ukraine and even a handful of internet blogs , but birding as a hobby is a long way from becoming as popular as it is in Ukraine 's immediate neighbours to the west .
A cookie is a piece of information that is saved to the hard drive of your computer or mobile device .
One thought is echoed time and again - that having a child is the most creative act of all .
When fear , preoccupation , tiredness , and exertion combine to rob the mind of its remaining Random Access Memory , you forget an island is an island .
So perhaps I am just a middle-aged hippie , but I do genuinely think that such a world is a possibility and not just a dream .
A manyatta is a livestock camp that Maasai boys build after circumcision and spend a few years in to complete their transition to manhood .
Various Types of Student Assignments An assignment is a home based task that a student needs to complete before another class day comes .
And over and above what I have said , add something of no less weight : whether one who obeys a slave is an underslave , as the custom of your class names him , or a fellow-slave , what am I in respect of you ?
During cross-examination , Nolin questioned whether a ruler is the best way to measure a rope .
Times Square around the holidays on a weekend is a terrible no good very bad place ... we pushed through the crowds and the Elmo impersonators and the men hawking sight-seeing bus rides , and we made it to the theater 15 minutes before curtain .
Camping at a festival is an experience that ca n't be explained .
How would you feel if an american was this startlingly rude to a friendly dweller of the dark ?
Review : I guess calling this a musical is a stretch .
A drug is a chemical substance that affects the processes of the mind or body .
Another thing that many people do n't consider when purchasing a product with a rebate is the fact that the rebate essentially removes any ability to return a product .
A photogravure is a print created through the use of both photographic and etching techniques .
Within days , Gordon 's complaints were forwarded from headquarters to Allan Pratt , a physician who also serves as the president of the Mormon stake ( a stake is the equivalent of a Catholic diocese ) near where Twede lives in Florida .
The smallest legal subdivision that may be included in an offer is a quarter-quarter section ( 40 acres ) , unless the offer is for a lot or only a portion of a quarter-quarter section is available 2 .
The critical date of an offer is the date that it is filed in the proper BLM office .
Writing off a debt is the accounting recognition that a debt is unlikely to be collected .
He is transformed , through workaholism , to embody the popular notion that a salesman is a scurrying bug .
An example of a hyperlink is this piece of text right here [ 33 ] .
A meta-analysis is an especially powerful type of study because it includes a large number of subjects , and by combining studies is much more reliable than a single study .
The best thing about being a Muslim is the fact that no one can see the marks on your wife after you 've beaten her .
Starting up the BIRT engine is resource intensive ; therefore using only one instance for an application is the recommended usage scenario .
I believe a serious threat of an overthrow is all it would really take and they would give us what we want .
A photomicrograph is a technical document that can be of great significance to science or industry .
This randomness is not visible in its result , viz. a truth , for a truth is an ideal collecting of " all " the evaluations : it is a complete part of the situation .
What one can the most explicitly connect up with proper names that designate a subjectivization is an arsenal of words which make up the deployed matrix of fidelity marks .
A subject is the autonym of an empty idiom ( langue ) .
I would imagine that it differs greatly if a client is a service provider vs. a retail product like American Apparel vs. a Tucker Max book .
When a date is the last day of the month , adding or subtracting any number of months will give a result that is also the last day of the month ( e.g if you start on Jan 31st, you will land on : Feb 28th, Mar 31st, etc ) .
Oh , and the last post on a topic is a picture of tub girl .
Yes , the karma thing is a bit odd and might be a bit overengineered ; yes , the difference between a comment and an answer is both unclear and unnecessary ; yes , there 's no metacommentary channel right now .
He credited his upbringing in Waterford for his drive , but said behind his focus in getting a job was the recession .
Conducting a contest is a great way to generate interest and incoming links , everyone wants to win and in order to garner votes many competitors will tell their audience about contests and voting options .
An arrest is an arrest is an arrest .
A trial is a trial is a trial .
A state is a point in the flow where something happens ; for instance , displaying a view or executing an action .
A special sign of their presence in a community was a burning cross , which they would set up and light in the front yards of those they wanted to frighten .
Actually in XWiki an application is a set of XWiki documents .
An Object is an entity grouping several meta data together and which can be attached to a page .
A Class is a normal page that you have marked as containing a type definition .
A template is a sample document using the concerned Class Object .
Since a template is a sample page , it should contain a Todo Object attached to it .
" A lawyer is a person who profits by creating confusion .
AH : I like the idea of a book being a democratic space which readers enter , carrying their own thoughts , and participate in a conversation , or experience of grace .
Okay , I realize I have thrown a new thought in here , that being that a dimension is a state of consciousness .
A dimension is a state of consciousness .
We never know the worth of water till the well is dry ~Thomas Fuller , Gnomologia , 1732 Pure water is the world 's first and foremost medicine ~Slovakian Proverb A lake carries you into recesses of feeling otherwise impenetrable ~William Wordsworth A lake is the landscape 's most beautiful and expressive feature .
I agree with Meister Eckardt : " The fruitfulness of a gift is the only true way to show gratitude for the gift .
Executing triple jumps in a row is a challenge .
Most non-smokers can tell if a person is a smoker by their breath which " smells like an ashtray " .
Recovery from such a procedure is a matter of a day or so , allowing you time to do some sight-seeing whilst you were away which minimal pain .
If a tear is a chrysalis what could open out from them and break , changed , into the world ?
Silver at forty bucks an ounce is the most undervalued asset in the history of mankind and this fool speaking should not be giving advice .
A hologram is a three-dimensional photograph created with a sophisticated laser , which changes the perspective of the image when moved .
You know , I think one of the the things that made the Brosnan films suffer a bit was the weakness of the villians .
Playing in a bookshop is a far cry from all the angst , the noise and the weird time signatures that characterise this kind of sound .
We should keep the pint , but a third of a pint is a step forward .
Intelligent , highly-enjoyable fluff The Internationalist , The Gate , London Elliot Cowan 's Lowell pretending to stand outside in the cold waiting for a taxi is the first time in ages that I 've seen an actor on stage , indoors , who has actually looked like they might be outdoors in the elements ; the way he stands in relation to the imagined space is spot on .
Cause Of Death A woman is the chief suspect in her husband 's murder , but the Deputy District Attorney thinks she may be innocent .
Also say its your 30th and a dog is the only thing thats missing fro your life O 0 I think def do some breed research and see what kind of dog will suit your lifestyle !
Actually a dog is the only thing missing now ... lol Just got to convince Peter !
( A pneumataphore was a device for removing carbon dioxide from the air ) .
A relationship is a two-way thing and we need to treat it like a flower .
£ 15 -17 an hour is the going rate for an Engine / Airframe Fitter and he wo n't be doing any ' special things ' for aircrew or anybody else for that matter .
An alternative is the use of bacteria to produce yoghurt ...
My Grandma Lives there , the best place for a drink is the Le * ds Arms on Church Street at Wales Square :thumbsup: Well , it 's been a while since you 've been there is n't it ?
Mesomorph : A mesomorph is the individual whose body makeup would be termed muscular ; they can be thick bodies and rather hard looking .
A good example of a mesomorph is the a competitive body builder .
Still , a slave is a slave and the greater tragedy was to end up as one of the rare sacrifices to the gods and the master 's ancestors or to be buried alive along with the master to serve him in the afterlife .
Cookies A cookie is a small text file which Koka Lagoon Cruises may put on your computer 's hard disk in order to recognise your computer at a later time .
A plan is a text file named that is located in your main directory .
An apology is a good thing , but more than a year after the Gaither opinion , a taint remains .
* A jeon is a monetary unit that was worth one-hundredth of a won .
Prescribed burning of a forest is the carefully controlled use of fire to remove undergrowth and debris and promote healthy growth of the forest as a whole .
Generally , an emergency is any incident that involves death , serious injury , or threat of death or serious injury to people ; significant damage to university facilities , research materials , property , and / or data ; or significant disruption of university operations .
A parable is a contradiction that has many meanings , a story that unravels , like Escher 's drawing .
Such an undertaking is an engineering nightmare .
A cap is the maximum interest rate the issuer will pay regardless of how high the reference rate may go , and therefore protects the issuer from escalating interest costs .
The cake is a lie is a reference to the video game Portal in which the players are told they will be rewarded for their tasks with cake .
The car with a balloon was the right analogy .
He 's been crap even with us , all our matches against MU have been spoilt by his stupid decisions everytime he referee 'd these matches - whether these decisions went in our favour is out of context , a mistake is a mistake .
As with endoscopic sinus surgery , an infection is the most common complication after a polypectomy .
A feature is the ability to view selected biblical text side-by-side with the user 's choice of commentary and annotations .
A psychotherapist is a trained mental health professional who will listen to your problems and suggest strategies that may help you to resolve them .
A colonoscopy is a type of endoscopy that is used to examine your bowels .
An endoscope is a long , thin , flexible tube with a light source and a video camera at one end .
" The £ 200,000 a year is a major part of our budget .
HPV Status Is Prognostic in Oropharyngeal Cancer June 16 , 2010 ( Chicago , Illinois ) - The human papillomavirus ( HPV ) status of a tumor is a " strong and independent " prognostic factor for survival in patients with oropharyngeal cancer .
A stroke is a serious medical condition that occurs when the blood supply to your brain is disturbed .
A neuroprosthesis is a newer type of orthosis .
A catheter is a thin flexible tube that is inserted into the urethra ( the opening in the penis or vagina that urine flows out of ) or through a hole in the abdomen ( tummy ) .
A ventilator is a mechanical device designed to replicate the function of the diaphragm by regulating the pressure of the lungs .
An alternative to using a ventilator is a device known as a phrenic nerve stimulator .
Ultimately , reviews have come to influence most of our purchases and for many people , booking a holiday is the largest online purchase they will make in a year .
As sweet as a rose is The meekness of Moses .
' A swine is a swine is a swine .
Ruuttila 's best finish in five years as a professional was a tie for sixth at the 2007 Finnair Masters , when she played in the final group on Sunday , but she has never led an LET event , although she has won five titles on the Swedish Nordea Tour in the last two years .
" Hmmm , Antbod , a pier is a " raised structure , including bridge and building supports and walkways , over water , typically supported by widely spread piles or pillars " .
Purpose : In information technology , a kiosk is a small physical structure ( often including a computer and a display screen ) that displays information for people walking by .
A vehicle is a vehicle is a vehicle .
riding a bike is an expression of self , I am sorry but non bikers typically will rarely understand us ' bikers ' , we are a in the minority , always have been and always will be .
looking at villavolvos post this is the hole in the middle of the bumper that he refers too , is this the hole for the louvre your talking about , underneath my bumper and back a bit is the engine gaurd , no louvres and no sign of any missing , cheers , cam .
Cyst A cyst is a fluid-filled sac or cavity in the body .
X-ray An X-ray is a painless way of producing pictures of inside the body using radiation .
An arthroscope is a narrow tube with a light and camera attached that sends pictures back to a television monitor .
A proverb is a short , pithy saying , which expresses a timeless truth and wisdom .
In Chomskian linguistics , a grammar is a model of the idealized language embodied in the language faculty , not of the performances produced by speakers as they go about their daily lives .
Moving from room to garden room , the only indications of a border are the masses of native plants , including rosa rugosa , beach plum , high bush blueberry , and viburnum .
Rather , a recession is a significant decline in economic activity spread across the economy , lasting more than a few months , normally visible in real GDP , real income , employment , industrial production , and wholesale-retail sales .
I know a comment is no place to seek clarity from the author - but worth a try .
Nestled on a float is a large bright video screen .
A zebra is a combination of " n " and whites .
One of the most common emotions amidst a tragedy is the feeling of being " peripheral .
" In Nickerson , a case interpreting an automobile-insurance policy , this Court held that a plaintiff was an occupant of an insured vehicle under circumstances similar to those in this case .
A new pond or a subdivision is a good sign that some major land changes occurred .
" I fear a world , " he said , " where we have to choose when the fetus is a person and a baby in a dumpster is a thing .
The only person who is competent to make a decision is the woman herself .
One of our liabilities as a movement is the public 's mixed views about abortion .
Since a prayer is an appeal , we should expect to see evidence of a right basis for this prayer template we refer to as the Lord 's Model Prayer .
An appeal is a plea extended to one who has authority over you , so it would be entirely inappropriate for the Lord Jesus Christ to extend an appeal to anyone other than His heavenly Father .
Furthermore , the process of becoming a lawyer is no easy task in of itself .
A covenant is a revelation , but a revelation that obliges the Revealer to a certain course of conduct ; or , if you would rather have a less theological word , it is a system of promise under which God mercifully has willed that we should live .
One of the first to provide an answer was the English philosopher Thomas Hobbes .
While you were sort of welcomed here for the hard work and labor you would give particularly to the big steel plants , finding a home was the thing which was a source of incredible frustration and humiliation .
I felt , as I have remarked in my Emilius , that unless an author be a man of intrigue , when he wishes to render his works really useful to any country whatsoever , he must compose them in some other .
" A foothold is a preexisting law or standard that , while not specifically intended to abet adaptive efforts , may be successfully used that way , thus allowing the integration of important climate concerns into an existing public or private mission .
When an object is encountered as a whole , I do n't have in mind that we encounter only some aspect or quality put forth by the object , but instead feel that the object as a whole is the result of the work or relations of the parts .
A factor is a type of agent who sells goods owned by another , called a principal .
For example , if a husband is the owner of a car and his wife uses the car for one of the purposes for which it was purchased , such as grocery shopping , then ...
Now how can a number be a pixel ?
[ 10 ] The second aspect of loyalty to a client is the lawyer 's obligation to decline subsequent representations involving positions adverse to a former client arising in substantially related matters .
For instance , the Court voided for vagueness a criminal statute providing that a person was a " gangster " and subject to fine or imprisonment if he was without lawful employment , had been either convicted at least three times for disorderly conduct or had been convicted of any other crime , and was " known to be a member of a gang of two or more persons .
On the other hand , many observers raise the question of whether or not reversal of a conviction is an appropriate remedy for a violation of rights such as these .
Foo Bar , you are reliably fair and balanced , but I am troubled by this independent research you are doing - per Greenwald , my readers are not supposed to know any more than I tell them - what kind of a blog is this , anyway ?
-- my readers are not supposed to know any more than I tell them - what kind of a blog is this , anyway ?--
Tony : And a pencil is an excellent analog because it was pencil thin .
Being a bridesmaid is an honor and a responsibility .
The saying goes that an attorney is an attorney 24 / 7 and is held to that standard even at a restaurant as 3 am on a Saturday night .
" A job is a good thing .
The MH -18 a charger is a little bit smaller than the slightly older MH -18 charger of the D 70 .
Yet a translation is a distortion of one object by another object .
A man is a Christian as he lives with Christ , and Christ lives with him .
A colony is a base for settlers who have are aggressive / military and confiscate more Palestinian land .
When such a person is a male , he is called an administrator , while a woman is called an administratrix .
would mayweather loose to a woman is a different discussion , and I wont comment on that now .
digestif dee-jess-TEEF A digestif is an alcoholic beverage served after a meal , intended to stimulate digestion .
estuary An estuary is a body of water where fresh water from a river meets the salt water of an ocean .
The term is Bruno Latour 's : an actant is a source of action that can be either human or nonhuman ; it is that which has efficacy , can do things , has sufficient coherence to make a difference , produce effects , alter the course of events .
To paraphrase a well known medical maxim - if it looks like a plane , it most probably is a plane ( although technically a plane is a woodworking tool ) .
1 - A system A system is a predetermined set of criteria that , when they are fulfilled by the movement of the market , triggers an entry long or short .
And one of her most useful tips in getting prepared for a holiday was the count down technique .
An impairment is the specific part of the body or brain that does n't function fully .
8 pints a day is the recommended amount as you will be sweating out a lot if it .
Having a complete ban on alcohol to me is too extreme of a step though , because in sport socialising after a big game and getting together for a drink is a part of culture and a means of building team spirit .
He has for over a decade been a member of NACRO 's National Race Issues Advisory Committee .
The only thing I can mention as a disadvantage is the price .
The MSI 870 A Fuzion is the first motherboard with an AM 3 socket that supports dual GPUs from both NVIDIA and AMD .
Plancing a ban is a blatent attempt to make more money by the organisers .
But a computer is a computer .
But like most speices I would think 2 -3 grms a month is a good guide .
Whether or not a text must convey a message is a question of relevance to the study of dreams .
Thus a text is a formal unit .
I will keep to Chatman 's basic formulation of story and discourse , incorporating into it Bal 's ( 1985 ) usage of the terms event , actors and to act : " An event is the transition from one state to another state .
What we usually call a story is a product of having imposed conventional narrative structures on selected content .
I was also about to be divorced from someone ( J . ) whose academic career had taken precedence over mine and as a result was the main reason I had remained for years in what I considered a one-down position of university adjunct .
When you enter numbers and operands into the keypad of the calculator , somehow , the program has to keep track of whether the first or second number to be added or multiplied has been entered ; whether the " Clear " or " Clear Entry " key has been pressed ; whether a number is a new calculation or the continuation of one already in progress .
The main difference between a queue and a stack is the order in which things are taken out again .
Considering that , once granted , the person chosen for tenure is by definition going to be there for life , it does not seem completely unreasonable to me that the personality and views of a candidate are a real ( if unacknowledged ) consideration .
In 2012 , we used capture-recapture methodology , an accepted statistical methodology , to account for those who did not respond , under-coverage , and misclassification as to whether a property is a farm or not .
A final factor that might play a role is the emotional payoff that comes from engaging in illicit behaviour .
A chandelle is a stylized climbing turn .
Here 's a famous example : An albatross is a huge bird that spends its life flying over the oceans of the world .
In the most recent studies , lead was not detectable in most foods and the average dietary intake of lead was about 1 microgram ( a microgram is a millionth of a gram ) per kilogram of body weight per day .
Limited Liability Company : An LLC is a formal association which combines the advantage of a corporation 's limited liability and the flexibility and single taxation of a general partnership .
At its heart , a catalyst is a way to save energy .
A metaphor is a bridge from the known to the unknown .
( following Ariston 7 - March -2009 ) or more exactly : A metaphor is a harpoon thrown from the known into the unknown .
The sequence of characters " " in content when it does not mark the end of a section is a well-formedness error .
Generally , car parking an automobile in the road or maybe in a driveway is a lot less protect than parking it in the garage or guaranteed lot .
A sunspot is a big region of the Sun which looks darker than the rest of the disk .
A synopsis is a summary of your book .
A batholith is a geologic feature that formed by the cooling of a large igneous body of magma below the earth 's surface ; if a similar igneous body reaches the earth 's surface , it would form a volcanic feature such as a lava flow .
Now the question is how much of a constraint is the 0 bound on commercial bank lending ?
THE PRINCIPLE : Rights granted under the Constitution should be granted equally to all citizens , or if an individual is the citizen of a sovereign foreign nation , then that should be recognized along with the treatment appropriate to any citizen of any foreign nation .
A grid is the division of a layout with vertical and / or horizontal guidelines to incorporate margins , spaces and columns in order to provide a framework for organizing content .
A collection is a essentially a single index that spans many SolrCore 's , both for index scaling as well as redundancy .
By this means , politicians become popular in their own time and the public pays for it later ... the measure of such a politician is the delay time ...
More than one of the customers has asked me when I think the garden will be finished and my crafted answer is that " when I am dead " as to me a garden is a work in progress in which changes occur every year .
The fact that a corporation is a legal entity in its own right ( it can buy , sell , borrow , loan , sue and be sued , possess property , etc. ) provides the owners some security .
A corporation is a piece of paper , a STATE charter .
The tiny white box of a theater is a living multi-media landscape , bursting with strange and gorgeous images of tea gardens , Tokyo nightlife , and propaganda films .
" One thing I learned accidentally in college was that the folks the most inclined to joining a herd are the ones who decry herds the loudest .
Only when the Supreme Court agrees to hear a case is a rule produced that is binding on all circuits .
Contrary to Gertrude Stein 's mantra " a rose is a rose , is a rose " , Ms Peter 's Rose is not just another rose in a lineup of roses trying to fill the shoes of Ethel Merman for whom the show was written .
To others , a ghost is a demon spirit which has been unleashed by Satan to live in a certain environment .
I 'm not talking about sex buddies - I 'm talking people who feel a partner is the key to their social life , moving up the ladder , gotta have some sex , looking cool to friends , in other words " arriving .
You know a place is a chick magnet if you see broads there no matter what time of the day it is .
Salome stood to answer the question , " a check is a form of payment .
However , the type of a relationship is the OID ( or a collection of OIDs ) for the target class .
If you are not familiar with the term , a brewpub is a restaurant that produces its own beer .
What is making FMD a disaster is the horrible , almost insane , over-reaction to it by the Blair Government .
A computer is a machine that can perform computation .
A computer is a device that can solve these and similar problems .
A computer is a fundamental discovery of human mind .
A bus is a set of wires that connect the above components .
An impeachment is a political act , sure , but it is also a legal one .
Being an artist is a difficult calling .
His score at the end of a run is the sum of these rewards and penalties .
A chromosome is a list of strings , where each string is a procedure name .
A fact is a true , accurate piece of information .
It is impossible to tell whether an item is a classic or incompetent , an especially serious problem with respect to medicine .
Translation of the oldest extant book on forensic medicine ( ca 1247 ) , which discusses how to determine whether a death is an accident , suicide , or homicide , and who was responsible .
The Handbook does not assume that a lawsuit is the ...
If you look past the big - " c " Conclusions of this study , you 'll find a tactical gem buried in the narrative - a piece of study advice I 've been promoting for years : the best guide for how to study for a class is the first exam .
King claims that he > supports the original thesis that , for serious breaches of privacy , > lack of a computer is no protection against data collection .
It is apparent to me that this means that a university is a place where persons of all races , creeds , and by extension , lifestyles may come together in the pursuit of truth and knowledge .
The combination of a user ID or card number and a password is an example of a credential .
Abahlali baseMjondolo Press Statement 18 January 2014 Unyawo Alunampumulo : A person is a person where ever they find themselves .
A neighbour is a neighbour no matter where they were born .
A comrade is a comrade no matter where they were born or what language they speak .
During the xenophobic attacks in May 2008 we insisted that a person is a person where ever they may find themselves .
Another reason some women may choose a mastectomy is the fear of the cancer recurring .
Everyone who can access a computer is a potential creator and user of copyright-protected material .
They are also much more hungry because they are often coming from much more humble backgrounds and becoming an entrepreneur is a necessity rather than a luxury .
Becoming a counselor is a competitive process .
If a resource is the effect of one task and a precondition of another then there is a precedence dependency between the two tasks , requiring that the tasks be performed in the correct order and the flow of the resource between the two be managed .
Maybe we can answer this by expanding your question : what if a person is an alcoholic ?
Make sure your students understand that a slogan is a short phrase which is associated with a product .
Think about what a religion is : A religion is a system of supposed truths that are accepted as true by faith .
A religion is a system of supposed truths upon which a person relies for his present and future well-being .
Moreover , a religion is a system of supposed truths that the religionist seeks to persuade others to adopt and believe .
Differing from a symbol or an allegory , a typology is a representation of an actual , historical reference .
The moments leading up to a race are this crazy mix of emotions : excitement , anticipation , terror ??
" I ca n't but wonder what kind of demential design gave birth to such a sensitive piece of hardware : the BIOS ROM in a PC is a fundamental part of it : without it the machine is totally unusable .
Fear is what holds back anyone from success , people need to learn that a Fear is a perception of the future , it 's not real .
( An example of such a program is the AP Computer Science Case Study .
A vocation is a call that requires a free and responsible answer .
A manger is a trough .
Well , a second album within a year is a good thing .
" A mason is a man who professes a faith in God .
The g-norm of a decimal is the decimal itself .
A hamlet is the smallest geographic entity we use .
A village is a small cluster of houses .
A town is a village which at one time , perhaps recently , felt it was large enough to hold regularly scheduled markets or fairs , either weekly or annually .
A parish is the area served by a church .
As an alternative is a site where you just enter a street and number , and the code is returned .
An example is the function , which takes as one of its arguments a pattern describing the output format required for a decimal number .
Time is exceptional , a song I would have struggled to name yesterday , while Drive in Saturday is written with the American teen public in mind but still manages to be an absolute gem of a song for the genre it portrays 8 and a half is a fair review for this album .
The beauty of a woman is a private treasure and not a public property to be enjoyed by one and all .
The expected value of a cell is the product of the marginal totals for that cell divided by the grand total for the table .
Connected to the church grounds by a footbridge is the New Cemetery .
They will be Normal for the mutation involved , an eg is the Cockatiel the normal Cockatiel is grey bird !
A monopoly is an enterprise that is the only seller of a good or service .
The " index of refraction " of a material is the ratio between " c " and the speed of light in that material .
Profit as a motive is a very low tone scale activity for a mind to engage in as the ideal , for it is not a high minded motive .
When Betsy realizes that his idea of a date is a porn movie in the sleaziest area of town , she walks out and refuses to ever speak to him again .
Let no one imagine that a tower is a superfluous expense , it forms an essential part of the building , and should always be provided in the plan of a parochial church .
A bid is an undertaking to win a certain number of tricks in a specified suit or in no trumps .
A call is any bid , double , redouble or pass. This becomes important when you correct an insufficient bid .
A cookie is a small piece of information sent by a Website that is saved on your hard disk by your computer 's browser .
So all my life I 've sought to understand how to be a person-to be a good person-in a world in which danger is either random ( taking the form of , say , cancer or car accidents ) or comes from human failure and frailty and prejudice .
And how ominous a sign is this really ?
A business partnership composed of a saint and a sinner is an unwholesome bond from which the believer should free himself .
But an education is an important thing .
A hilist is a convenient way to view your docking results in a chemical spreadsheet .
A resolution is a resolve or determination-it is making an earnest decision , and sticking to it .
But he wrote , too , that " this new self , who could do so much , could not ultimately save her " , and , in a letter to Keith Sagar in 1981 , he referred to Jung 's view that the moment of achieving such a rebirth was the most dangerous moment , when the person was most vulnerable 10 .
Like they could fly in the Jefferson Airplane Time Machine and experience music like it once was - when a concert was an event in your life .
A disciple is a student and the only textbook is the Word of Christ in the prophets and the prophecies made more certain by Jesus of Nazareth .
Swing as a dance was the main dance that would be changed or another variation of the same dance was introduced such as " single rhythm " instead of the " triple rhythm " as well as many performers trying to take credit for a new style by giving it a new name , most did n't catch on .
For example , if the value of a key is an IPv 4 address , that address should simply be stored as four bytes of binary data , not as a variable-length 7 -15 byte ASCII string giving the address represented in textual dotted decimal notation .
This is an indication of the fact that each emission and each absorption of a photon is an independent event , not influenced significantly by other electromagnetic radiation .
For example , the dipole moment of a molecule is a QM entity , but the radiation field it interacts with is a classical field .
A hohlraum is a good approximation however .
An override is a file or database entry that is loaded instead of the normal core file .
A book is a series of chapters .
A film is a series of scenes .
The idea that a track is the " natural unit of music " is shaky even in that context , but absurd when considering works like symphonies and operas .
Such an accusation is an exercise in empowering a straw man of their own creation .
One of my favorite books as a resident was a book called Chest Radiology - Patterns and Differential Diagnoses .
Creating a headline that 's a question is a great way to grab a user 's attention .
A fogey is a culturally conservative young person , prematurely young you might say , who adopts the clothing , style , and mannerisms of a bygone age .
A notecard is a text object that is not seen in the SL landscape , but is passed on from person to person .
Second , they need to fit the following definition : A server is a computer system that provides services or data to other computing systems - called clients - over a network or other communication device .
If a server is a computer system that maintains and controls other computer systems , then Teletraan is definitely a server .
A lead is a lead .
A blog was a place to get things down , a jewel box of sorts for collecting favorites , a hub for sharing and connecting with likeminded people .
I ca n't tell which is funnier : The fact that this strange man thought I was some sort of portable hooker , parking my van behind churches and waiting for patrons , or that my proof against being a hooker was the fact that I was wearing mittens .
Is there anyone who believes a bishop in 1984 was unaware that raping a child was a crime ?
Can an atheist be a fundamentalist ?
As a concept , the straight-lined letters work the best ; the curved letters like the O and B seem a little forced , but there are exceptions : an oak leaf makes a comma and an acorn is the period .
An abscess is a benign ( non-cancerous ) closed pocket containing pus ( a creamy , thick , pale yellow or yellow-green fluid ) .
A hammertoe is a toe that is bent because of a weakened muscle that makes the tendons shorter , causing the toes to curl under the feet .
" A callus is a build-up of hard skin , usually on the underside of the foot .
" A corn is a build-up of hard skin near a bony area of a toe or between toes .
" A hammertoe is a toe that is bent because of a weakened muscle .
Growing up with Oscar for a father was a life full of fun , as daughters Linda Kay Butler and June Brooks explained to Petroshus .
An electret is an analog of a permanent magnet .
In other sciences , an anomaly is a phenomenon that does not fit with the current paradigm or that seems to violate a law of nature .
" Getting connectivity to a destination is the essence of the ability of that destination to remain attractive , " he explained .
Across a hall is a new , much larger church where Sunday liturgies are celebrated ; people from the local area come up to the monastery to attend .
Donnay and Harker discovered that the order of decreasing prominence of the faces of a crystal was the same as the order of decreasing interplanar lattice spacings , including the halvings , thirdings , and quarterings due to the space group symmetries .
A union is a group of workers who join together to achieve respect , fairness , dignity , and a voice in workplace decisions .
A saint is a normal person , a person as God made him .
One of the principal obstacles to such a dialogue is the uncontrolled proselytism in Russia by Roman Catholics and Protestants .
At one end of a spectrum are those consequentialists who are so captivated by the prospect of the new world of " happy millions " that they think it obscurantist to object to any evil means needed to achieve it-indeed , they agree with Lady Carbury in not calling such means evil .
Since a compromise is a sort of bargain where parties sacrifice some good objectives in order to gain others , it raises a question about how far such deals can go , and this brings us into dirty hands territory .
A sacrament is a special act of Christian worship , instituted by Christ , which uses a visible sign to proclaim the promise of the gospel for the forgiveness of sins and eternal life .
I find it funny that Cynthia did n't see anything wrong with what Kenya did to Porsha but Nene calling Peter a bitch was an issue !
" , and a why-question is a request for an explanation , it can be useful to think of a cause as a certain type of explanation .
For Aristotle , the ultimate moving principle responsible for the generation of a man is a fully developed living creature of the same kind ; that is , a man who is formally the same as the end of generation .
" Just as , when perfected , a human is the best of animals , so also when separated from law and justice , he is the worst of all " ( 1253 a 31 -3 ) .
For example , a child has a deliberative capacity , but it is undeveloped and incomplete in comparison with an adult 's , so that a child is a fit subject for paternal rule by its father ; but paternal rule would be inappropriate between two adults who both have mature rational capacities ( see Politics I .13 and III .6 ) .
For around 6.5 million workers in the UK , being in a union is a recognition that we need organisations to defend us at work .
The right of the state to impression a person is the one form of slavery specifically allowed by the Constitution .
Otherwise if the price of the '95 over a '96 is the reason , then go for it , great car , great ability , great room for all sorts of improvements / modifications .
" Understanding the carbon account of a business is a vital first step in thinking about climate change .
Could bad weather be an issue are any legs of the trip so long that a detour or something to fix may take you into the darkness .
Quite apart from making it easier to find each other in the crowd , coming to a festival dressed in such a way was a stroke of genius , especially as they 'd even put in enough thought to bring a spare hat for people wanting to have their photo taken with the group .
Does it make any difference what shape the off - piste shape is , on the basis that a collapse is a collapse , in what way does doing anything change the collapse .
' Going for a spin is a very regular occurrence in our household .
Oh what an affliction is this state of my eyes !
A tsunami is a wall or surge of water where the sea level behind it has risen and is as high as the front .
" But that whole achievement of getting to the last four and losing in four sets to Rafa , who will go down as one of the greatest players of all time , and making three Grand Slam semis and a final in a year is a phenomenal achievement .
So some might think taking a bike is a good wheeze to get around excess baggage charges .
( Why pay to go in when Founder 's Day would have provided free entry ?? ) One thing I always thought a shame was that no-one played the organ in the Central Hall for Speech Day , it was reputedly a good one , and would have given it much more atmosphere .
( It was presumed by all of the educated people of that age ( the 17th century ) that a deaf-mute was a mentally handicapped person and that trying to educate or trying to communicate religios truths to such a person would be a waste of time .
A sequester is an automatic across-the-board proportional spending cut written into law and implemented by the Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) .
A parabola is the set of points equidistant from a line , called the directrix , and a fixed point , called the focus .
Not because I feel pants on a woman is some horrible butch lesbian stereotype , but that drawing your women like dudes is .
I worry , though , about the judgmentalism inherent in the statement that if a person 's first response to a layoff was a bad response , you 'd question the " validity of their confession of faith .
When a man is a true man according to the Biblical definition , many common marriage problems can be avoided altogether .
The danger of governments running a deficit is that everyone else 's surplus may cause people to spend too much and cause inflation .
Of course , reaching an understanding is a strategy of sorts , but it is a unique one for two reasons .
Every male over the age of 18 and not specifically restricted from owning a weapon is a member of the militia .
Jumping off a waterfall is a paying job ?
Unless , a blowjob is the only answer !
I would argue that innovative programming seeking to challenge the ease with which a casual viewer might make sense of a program is a relatively new phenomenon , dating back to the 1990 s with innovators like Seinfeld , Twin Peaks , and The X-Files , and typifying an increasingly common model of television storytelling that I have termed " narrative complexity .
Reducing complex issues in such a way is a shame .
You specify that a file is a file list by prefixing its name with the @ sign , e.g. , LIST @ XXX specifies that LIST is to operate on the files listed in the file XXX instead of on XXX itself .
For others , joining an accelerator was an opportunity to view their businesses through a wider lens in a life that can be consuming and where perspectives can get myopic .
MT - The unspoken message in today 's Mark Trail : adopting a pet is a gamble !
" MT - The unspoken message in today 's Mark Trail : adopting a pet is a gamble !
" A temptation is a solicitation to go wrong ; a testing is an opportunity to do right .
" Though I suppose if a corporation is a person , why not a state ?
In determining what the best interests of a child are the court will consider the following matters in s 60 CC of the Family Law Act .
Living life as an expat is a fantastic adventure , but my spirit never belonged to another country .
Similar to a parabola but opening up somewhat faster , a catenary is the shape of a dangling chain .
I do n't happen to think that working out two hours a day is a waste of time .
Such a dismissal is a final decision , subject to no further review , unless there is an allegation in the complaint that the attorney committed a crime , in which case a finding of no probable cause will be reviewed by the Statewide Grievance Committee .
A comparison is The Sixth Sense , when the big reveal is followed by a series of flashback images to moments that take on new meaning .
At least with the Kindle DRM and the whole process of buying a book is a fairly seamless experience .
Lets face it a service is a service is a service .
A myth is a story or trend that a culture believes to be true .
A rating is a difficult thing to offer - some people just do n't seem to enjoy paddle move tricks , and after all you are just making an arrow jumping around , you 're not reading minds or floating tables .
That there cannot be interim solutions hosted by the FCA , or any commitment to a date is a disgrace .
Flying a microlight is an exhilarating experience - and one which needs strong nerves and a real head for heights !
Whilst I fully agree with Di 's point about marketing , I must inject a note of caution : a rehearsal in front of an audience is the same as a performance , and is likely to be treated that way by Musicscope , and will therefore be subject to performance royalties .
After all , the major advantage when I upgraded my ' proper ' RiscPC from a 600 to a StrongARM was the speed increase - and obviously , a modern PC running VRPC is rather nippy anyway !
Now whether one takes it to MB or an indie is a matter of personal choice , or diy if you feel so inclined .
But yes , being a politicain , especially a minister is an extremely difficult job , and the pay is relatively low compared to what the equivilent position would get you in the private sector .
' Being a looter is a hate crime too , but who are you hating ?
I believe a forest or a mountain are the best places to worship Him .
The extra 5 p / 6 p a litre is a bargain compared to the benefits .
A sound-bite is a useful tool ( take " Speed Kills " ) , but everybody is cynical these days , and the message that we want to put across is requires an open mind to recieve it - most people are not ready to listen even after getting a few tickets ...
First stop to get a beer is The Working Mens Social Club .
Just because a guy is the son of a driver does n't mean he is going to love it and go on to succeed at it like his dad did .
Calling Pitsmoor a dump is a very basic observation .
A car is a lot cheeper than rent or trying to buy a house .
A watt-second is the amount of energy needed to heat one gram of water one degree Celsius .
It seems that holding a charge was an issue with the E model .
Greek Myths : The Birth of a Crisis is the latest in a series of one off documentaries produced by Sky News .
But competition between a number of banks leads to better deals for consumers , a monopoly is an inherently bad idea as it allows the monopoliser to act with impunity .
I was n't nic picking either , i was serious , do n't you think a pc is a luxury item for some people , it is for me .
Originally posted by poppins I was n't nic picking either , i was serious , do n't you think a pc is a luxury item for some people , it is for me .
A commando is an Irregular warfare / guerilla fighter and conduct raids / shock movements upon an enemy force .
A potentiometer is an obvious advantage and I would like to go that way .
As a gamer , a more suitable price for gamers would be desirable as £ 39.99 for the standard edition of a game is a bit excessive when the special edition of the same game costs £ 44.99 .
A screener gives a high quality copy of the movie , while a cam is a film recorded with a video camera .
Moreover , who actually decides whether a dialect is a language ?
- A roll-cage is an integral part of the chassis and greatly improves safety and stiffness .
If you are under attack from analysis objects , just quote the design creed of the bottom-up manifesto : ' a class is an abstraction ; an object is not a thing .
Branding is a great way to unify a product , but even creating a simple brand for a website is a great and easy way to achieve unity .
" - Léon Bloy ( who also , I believe , was the source of one of the epigraphs to John Irving 's A Prayer for Owen Meany : " Any Christian who is not a hero is a pig .
This means that you will be charged interest for the period of time in which you used the money loaned to you An example is the cost of property damage caused by air pollution from a new plant Today many brokerage houses are recommending these shares at about $ 45 per share .
What you need to know is a few simple formulas for determining if a property is a good investment or not .
The atm an atm is an interesting combination of computer , communication , banking , and security technology all in one box .
An example is the photographs of Geoff Charles .
It is proposed that the Bank of England shall continue in possession of its present privileges - that it shall retain the exclusive right of issue , within a district of which sixty-five miles from London as a centre is the radius .
Such a thread was a clew , or ball of yarn , providing us with our modern word ' clue ' .
A tremendous tapestry of a tune is the perfect fabric for Smith 's superb vocals that thread through the melody in ' Doing The Unstuck ' and then " Trust ' receives an enthusiastic crowd reaction .
One step at a time is a good motto , better to get it right first time .
" A smile is an inexpensive way to change your looks " is one of the famous quotes of Charles Gordy which clearly portrays the importance of smile in determining your appearance .
If an individual is a member of the RCCP , the sponsor must retain evidence of their registration and provide it to UK Border Agency on Request .
The guidance notes that ' The role of an advocate is a specialism in its own right , and should ideally be provided by professionals who are independent of both statutory agencies and the older person .
Can a headscarf be a symbol of oppression ?
Ecuador has such fragile ecosystems and protecting them and RT as a whole is a relatively new concept there so I really appreciate the chance to make people more aware .
The existence of this provision does not mean that an investment in a joint enterprise that is not within the statutory definition is necessarily treated as a non-trading activity when assessing whether a group is a " trading group " .
I certainly believe that it 's possible - a sprite is a sprite is a sprite , but how can we apply ourselves as a community in the creation of ' current generation ' graphics ...
The first one " Operation Wild Geese " is inconsistent and has some strange storylines , but in its defense I must say that all versions that were released on Video or DVD are cut versions , that can easily be seen in a scene after the massacre in a village were a crucial scene and dialogue about someone being tortured has totally been removed .
An overpayment is an amount of housing benefit or council tax benefit which has been paid to you but which you were not entitled to receive .
More of a worry is the recruitment policy over the summer - far too much quantity , too little quality , a question mark over the mooted ' youth ploicy ' and the playing style - were n't we promised goals and a passing style .
Doing so will save you time importing photographs to your PC , but proceed with caution : If you 're not sure whether a picture is a keeper , it 's best to refrain from deleting it until you see it on a bigger screen .
Which fighter that never held a title was the alleged boxer avoided by the great Jack Johnson ?
The FSU based its right to take collective action on the fact that such a move was a guaranteed constitutional right under Finnish law .
I will scrape my brain and see if I can remember anything : A horsepower is a horsepower and they are all 33.000 foot pounds of work per something ( hour I think ) .
Hi Frank , With a hardtail mountain bike , i.e. front suspension only , and asuming the bike has the relevant fittings , then a rack 's the best way forward .
I find that the people who go on about it a lot are the ones who do something small like not using plastic bags , but quite happily drive everywhere .
" He who asks a question is a fool for five minutes ; he who does not ask a question remains a fool forever .
A slide is a slide and is against the rules therefore it was a penalty .
' Flipping ' a contract is an old dodge practised by the less-than-reputable fringes of the market .
Going for a walk is the most popular form of exercise , with nearly two thirds of women polled by Sheila 's Wheels citing walking as their favourite way to burn off calories .
That first piece of disinformation is - " No one can tell if a person is a mind control victim-certainly not regular family and neighbors , only a qualified therapist could know and since they ca n't tell no one can .
The first year and a half was a period of time when we did work together -- tax cuts and No Child Left Behind and the trade initiative .
An example is the account of how Mr Foyster saw a pencil , propelled by an invisible hand , rise from his study desk and scrawl words on the wall before his eyes ( EBR , p 59 ) .
A settlement is a system of many relationships , enabled by streets , people , ideas and nature .
An Entitlement is a contract between the University and its students .
It does n't help when judges fail to take account of the fact that a parent is a LIP either ; see Christopher Booker 's latest column on what appears to be bad behaviour by Mitting J arising from the LIP being incorrectly advised by the HMCTS staff .
Plus , that first sighting of a zombie is a doozy .
Becoming a puppet is a certain .
An example is the case of Father David Crowley who was allowed by his bishop in the face of warnings that he was a risk to boys to move to another part of England where he went on to sexually abuse more children .
Hitting them with an axe is a bad idea ( as the unfortunate village doctor discovers to his cost ) and they realise that once they have fed on the bones of their victims , these " silicates " become inactive and then split into two .
She taught the children to : " Meet each day with a smile , for a smile is the beginning of love " .
Principles of good character , on the other hand , do not derive from statements of eternal , universal values ; a virtue is a trait of character that is good for the person who has it , where the value of good character derives from the agent 's own commitments .
A joystick is a necessity if you want to progress further than the second grade yellow belt .
bottom line is that when a system is this corrupt , this evil and this non-responsive to both the law and the will of the people it must be , but whatever means necessary , abolished , nay , demolished .
So essentially UT and Western have agreed that providing a hyperlink is a copyright-relevant event .
The perceived lightness of a patch is a product of the relation between its luminance and that of its neighbors .
Fundamentally , in category theory a monad is a category with a particular kind of structure .
( As a reminder , a functor is an arrow between categories in the category of ( small ) categories .
" ReThinking a Lot is an attempt to undo Joni Mitchell 's dichotomy .
A tissue is a group of distinct and similar cells that carry out a specific set of functions .
A photon is a packet of light energy .
Thomas ' formative years as a physician was both as a practitioner working on the Islands resort communities on Lake Victoria where Ugandans escape from the harsh realities of their lives to go on little vacations .
Since the response to such an injury is a tracheotomy , it has been assumed that a small , standard tracheotomy incision was performed .
" A sniper is a highly trained marksman who operates alone , in a pair , or with a sniper team to maintain close visual contact with the enemy and engage targets from concealed positions or distances exceeding the detection capabilities of enemy personnel .
BTW - under your definition of " sniper , " every hunter with a gun and a scope is a " sniper .
And that 's taste uniqueness ; while a beep is a beep , or a black dot on white paper is just a dot , neither good nor bad , a single molecule on the tongue is necessarily either good or bad .
In a country were those that are armed and protected are not safe what happens to the masses .
Note that for the functionalist , the concept of a quale is the concept of a place within the color solid , but it is not the concept of whatever property in us happens to instantiate that place .
Congress " tried to make agencies which have to operate in secret accountable nevertheless to the law , " said former vice president Walter F. Mondale , who as a senator was a member of the Church Committee , which led the efforts to overhaul the system .
An image is an image .
Digging it in and mixing it with a shovel is a great way to do this , as it moves a lot of earth without pulverizing the soil particles the way tilling can .
However , if digging is just too hard on your back , using a tiller is a fine method .
It would put people on the wrong foot if you call both ethnic cleansing after which some smooth hasbarista ( a barista is an expert in presenting things nicely geddit ? ) explains it away as nothing more than a simple change of passport .
" Briefly , a man is a producer insofar as he is himself considered a factor of production , or as he is the owner of factors viewed as responsible for output .
My actual point was that a blog is a great way to learn some of the skills you 'll need to manage a brand in this engaged environment .
A bookmark is the " web address , " or URL ( Universal Resource Locator ) , of the specific page of the RDS Business Suite collection you are viewing .
26 The leading centurion of the sixty in a legion was the primipilus - the first centurion of the first maniple of the first cohort .
A brand is a promise ; it is the logo , the letterhead font , the website , the product , the telephone manner - it is even the delivery of a product or service , regardless if it is direct or via a third party .
It took Cresselly within sight of victory but they lost wickets to Hay ( 2 for 62 ) , Richard McKay ( 2 for 42 ) , Canton ( 3 for 54 ) and Chris Gibbs ( 2 for 59 ) so in the final analysis perhaps a draw was the fairest result after so much effort from both teams .
Rhys Dalling was the pick of the Fishguard bowling with 2 for 39 but Haverfordwest batted well and in the final analysis a draw was the fairest result after so my good innings .
I am sorry you are having such a hard time with your own issues regarding your children but I have to make one point in my eyes a mother is the person whom nutures and looks after you and is always there when you need her .
Comment : In an island where a catapult is an offensive weapon ( I kid you not ) , what is going wrong ?
Pupils who were regular smokers and who usually drank at least once a week were the most likely group to have taken drugs in the last month ( 66 % ) .
Whether a pupil was a regular smoker was the strongest predictor of whether they had taken drugs in the last year .
France as a whole is a good bet for a wine holiday , as the climate and terrain lend themselves well to grape cultivation .
Astronomers have found that the further from us a star is the more its light is red shifted .
This tells us that distant galaxies are moving away from us , and that the further a galaxy is the faster it is moving away .
Knowing how many of the photons which fall on the photoreactive surface will release an electron is an accurate measurement of the CCD 's sensitivity .
However the DVD package as a whole is a good one , and I feel the audio commentary adds tons to it .
A passphrase is a string of words and characters used to authenticate a user .
An exhibition is a starting point .
A fuse is a safety device .
But if a candle 's the wrong colour , it 's me that gets the bloody e-mails .
" Being an artist is a role game .
A class is a blueprint for one or more instances .
A pattern is a mental building block .
An idiom is a low-level pattern specific to a particular programming language .
Whether the outcome , the pros compared to the cons , was a wash is a matter of perspective .
] A size is a kind of value .
A scallop is a bivalve sea creature - much like an oyster , mussel or clam .
To say it was a success is an understatement .
After all , grandparents know that there 's nothing better than being a parent-except being a grandparent !
and a kernel is a " scalar-valued " function κ \ kappa on ZZ .
For edge-uu of face 11 , we can argue as in the paragraph above , looking at where 11 falls in row uu ; and the pairings of edge labels on opposite sides of an edge are the same on all other faces as they are on face 11 , since the symmetry given by the action of projective units preserves edge labels ( because it preserves denominators of 00 , from which the edge labellings derive ) .
Considering all of the above , Kennedy 's move from being a bookie to being a banker is the right one .
How on earth did we get to this point where we are deemed either irrelevant or the object of low level prejudice and marginalisation , have we as a church been the spiritual equivalent of Rip Van Winkle seeing the speck in the eye of others without noticing the plank in our own ?
" If the proof is in the pudding , I think such an analysis is a logical step in trying to resolve the controversy .
A man is a physical object that sees by interpreting light from other physical objects - that has nothing to do with whether the man survives - too much light would dazzle or perhaps blind him , but not kill him .
Nested inside a element are the declarations of nodes and edges .
The description of the squid costume is " It is like a squid if a squid was all plush and powder blue and did n't have any suckers [ if the player is wearing the squid costume ] .
In geometry the domain of an integrand is the object of interest ; in probability it 's the domain .
Bequests A bequest is a written direction contained in a will which disposes of some or all of the property controlled by the will .
And for most men , a woman is the right partner .
" A holiday is a holy day .
Time and a half is the least they deserve .
One example of a survey is the nationwide poll conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau every 10 years .
What may determine your choice of a technique are the complexity of the questions you want to ask and the importance of a 100 percent participation rate .
An introduction is an important part of any type of survey .
A ladder is a way for feet to climb ; Christ is the way by which the worst sinners may go up out of their sins , into the purity and blessedness of heaven .
Note that the defining 503 -- occurrence of a label is the implicit label declaration that 504 -- we are creating .
As I see it , when we say that an action is the result of luck , we do n't mean that the action was random .
The only grounds for legitimate protest of the outcome of a match is an alleged violation of the eligibility rule .
A match is the best 2 out of 3 games .
If your sound argument that a president is a president whether male or female is to go by ; then you should understand why in a democratic environment Ghanaian women should also have a chance at the Presidency .
" A cooperative is a different type of entity , " he said .
- Evan Esar A compromise is the art of dividing a cake in such a way that everyone believes he has the biggest piece .
Obama says that planting a garden is a way to start a national conversation about the health of our children .
Fitzgibbons 's charade of being a banker is a satire on banking itself , especially as it broke loose from government regulation to ravage the land , her rise to power and demented , despotic rule can also be seen as a version of Hitler 's .
A five-minute song is probably too short for multiple movements unless an artist is a master at seamless , organic-feeling transitions , which is one skill that Jon cannot currently boast .
Maybe its that one championship and smaller media or not being on a coast is the reason , but what can you do to alter this reality ?
" A garden is a tide .
A surcharge is an added liability imposed on something that is already due , such as a tax on tax .
Lack of an idea is an obstacle .
A goal is a dream with a deadline .
Charles Perrow 's analysis of the accident at Three Mile Island identified how systems can cause or prevent accidents .4 James Reason extended the thinking by analyzing multiple accidents to examine the role of systems and the human contribution to accidents .5 " A system is a set of interdependent elements interacting to achieve a common aim .
" An accident is an event that involves damage to a defined system that disrupts the ongoing or future output of that system .
However committing a crime is a personal choice .
A good example of a biochip is a sensor placed under the skin for detecting blood glucose ( see Chapter 7 for a discussion of internal sensing applications and limitations ) .
An immunoassay is a laboratory or clinical technique that uses the specific binding between an antigen and its homologous antibody to identify and quantify a substance in a sample .
An example is a hydrogel-based valve that swells / shrinks in the presence of certain salt / pH solutions .
An aptamer is an RNA or DNA molecule that assumes a particular shape and surface charge distribution that enables it to bind to a target .
In the older definition , a gene was a unit of heredity ( i.e. , something that encodes a detectable property of an organism ) .
But I also ca n't pretend it 's not happening , or that a girl talking during a set is the most important thing in the world .
Most vivid an exemplum is the Hopkins of Jas ' Elsner 's final footnote ( 99 , n 90 ) , who kicks a window frame while lamenting , " I want to be seduced by your prose , not bored by it !
I think that the whole sub-plot with Heather is meant to show that keeping her as a ghoul is an evil choice .
I believe that to lend a book is an incitement to theft .
Though it may seem ridiculous to have to point it out , a rash is a sign the skin may require treatment .
" The most called-upon prerequisite of a friend is an accessible ear .
A promise is all one needs .
[D]eposit in a repository is a clerical task whose cost is negligible ...
A fugue is a musical composition where a number of different instruments repeatedly play variations on a phrase .
A reservist is a person who is a member of a military reserve force .
A copy is a copy .
High Green as a whole is a bit of a mix , the estates around the perimeter tend to be modern private housing and the estates in the middle are mainly council housing .
By definition someone capable of having a child is an ADULT .
Mrs Dean said the decision to convert to an academy was an easy one , especially as many of its staff experienced its grant maintained status .
This kafuffle soon escalated to other Twitter users as one tweeter stuck their nose in saying : ' I 'm with Natalie on this one , being a mum is a full time job in its self !
Please feel free to contact me for more info on living with a beagle , then we can see if a beagle is the right breed for you .
The recommendation for consuming ayahuasca under the guidance of a shaman is a really good idea .
At the end of the day what I expect from a school is a well rounded education encompassing intellectual , physical and social growth and this is part of that .
What is definitively adopted and on what there is a consensus are the layout and size of the flag .
After all , a degree is a degree .
But doctors stress that getting on a plane is a bad idea with a small baby ; besides , I 'd hate to leave my husband in the middle of all this .
A body in a car was a private eye , who 'd been killed by ' ballistic pinball ' .
and the funniest bit , they had already been told not to do it by a professor in russia , a country were the corncrake walk within feet of the public in the town parks !!!
Castle [ 20:00 , Alibi ] A body in a fountain was a model .
An x-ray is an interesting analogy .
A header just over the bar after an hour was a small sign of life from the French attack , but the team was playing like its members were n't being paid enough to make an effort .
At its simplest definition , a fractal is any quantity or pattern that displays self-similarity and reveals greater complexity as it is enlarged .
I do n't make a habit of it , but yes , at weekends it is quite common for some adults to drink a whole bottle of wine to themselves when out to dinner , or socialising with friends , etc. As has been covered on this forum previously , there is sufficient medical evidence to support the fact that a glass of red wine a day is both good for your heart and helps reduce the BG .
Craig Kendall using hashtagblank : " When are the " other 10 " clubs going to realise that playing each team 4 -6 times a season is a joke ?
ok comparing it to a croc was a blatent overstatement but believe me , i dont drive cars timidly , me thinks i 'll just get me coat ...
The worst part about the holiday were the evenings , by paying All inclusive , and being at a 4 * hotel , you expect entertainment to be of a good standard , it was the most dull , boring , repetitive rubbish I have ever had to put up with , Spanish dancing and a disco were the main attraction every single night .
You could say that a bomb is an extremely wasteful , inefficient device because 99.9999 % of the energy it creates radiates in directions other than the target , up down , left right , front , back .
A battle is a combative engagement involving wholly or largely military forces that had the aim of inflicting lethal force against an opposing force .
A road-runner was a portable transistor radio which was left lying about in a suitable spot for the terrorists to find .
One thing that might be a factor is the size of your daughter 's hands and the span of her fingers ( although playing the piano would probably help with that ) .
A bathroom is a place where you spend a lot of time and it should be an enjoyable experience to visit it each day .
A baseline is a set of information against which you can gauge the result from an analysis of data .
A case is an individual for which data is collected on some of their characteristics or attributes .
A concept is an abstract and wide-ranging idea or notion which is considered to be a key element of the topic being researched .
A sample is a set of cases which is selected from a much larger set of cases , often known as a population .
Most of the time , it is actually more handy than an ipad size-wise , and - a cover was a tenner - it has a micro SD slot which can cope with up to 32 GB - it came with a mini-USB to standard USB socket cable so you can attach normal USB devices on it - it was £ 79.95 On the downside the screen is not up to Apple standard - I would have preferred better , but for this price it is fine .
A hospital was the usual place where the poor ended up in times gone by and meant the poor house , orphanage , almshouse or asylum , where abandoned children , pregnant women , travellers and the poor would be taken in .
All over the age of 40 and when 36 holes a day is a possibility , age can certainly be a factor .
A portal is an online service that provides a personalised , single point of access to resources that support the end-user in one or more tasks ( resource discovery , learning , research , buying plane tickets , booking hotel rooms , etc. ) .
A MulticastSocket is a ( UDP ) DatagramSocket , with additional capabilities for joining " groups " of other multicast hosts on the internet .
And the S 3 not being an iPhone is a good thing .
A tail is a reference to the activity profile of the insulin .
I think what is an issue is the standard of education that universities in the UK are offering .
A college is a public instition - if it is to give money away then it should be prepared to justify - to both its members , and the wider public on what grounds it has decided to make an award to one individual over another - and those grounds should be defensible - and the award should be made in an open and fair manner .
I remember the rule of being caught with a firearm was a minimum 5 years ?
He said : " I booked them in February and as far as I 'm concerned a deal is a deal .
The force a magnet exerts on an iron filing or the force the Earth 's magnetic field exerts on the needle of a compass are the most common examples of magnetism .
One shilling a week was the rent of this hovel , the roof of which was so low that a man could not stand upright in it .
* an exception is The Loner by the Bloomfields - gorgeous west coast harmony pop , and the theme from a REALLY BAD film starring Richard Harris as a legendary Israeli footballer .
But what has passed under the radar for over a century is a little known mechanism known as an Article V Convention .
A book author would say that there are certain underlying truths that endure , whatever the news throws up - but for topics like social media , business and marketing , the value of a long-form text like a book is the detail it holds about sources , tools , sites , techniques and market players - which is precisely the stuff that goes out of date .
An example was the Oxford Canal , which was authorised to impose a compensation toll of 2 s 9 d a ton on coal and 4 s 4 d on all other items at the junction of the Warwick & Napton Canal , and in this way received a quarter of a million pounds over twenty years .
An example was the through toll on iron goods from South Staffordshire to London , of 4 s 6 d per ton .
An example is the Aire & Calder Navigation in West Yorkshire , which runs for 34 miles from Leeds to Goole , with a 7½ mile branch from Wakefield ( where it connects with the Calder & Hebble Navigation ) to Castleford .
But great changes have come round since the time of Chaucer , and though an Englishman is an Englishman in general character all the world over , there is as much difference now in the tone of manners and language in the North and South as there is between the tones of an organ and those of a piano .
For those who believe that a fetus is a human being , this is like saying that if we could find a few hundred million dollars , and face the fact that , yes , teen-agers have sex , we could save the equivalent of the population of Arizona within a decade .
what does sales figures have anything to do with a game being the most anticipated ??
An identifier is a sequence of one or more letters and digits .
The static type ( or just type ) of a variable is the type defined by its declaration .
An array is a numbered sequence of elements of a single type , called the element type .
A slice is a descriptor for a contiguous segment of an underlying array and provides access to a numbered sequence of elements from that array .
A struct is a sequence of named elements , called fields , each of which has a name and a type .
A map is an unordered group of elements of one type , called the element type , indexed by a set of unique keys of another type , called the key type .
A block is a possibly empty sequence of declarations and statements within matching brace brackets .
The scope of a label is the body of the function in which it is declared and excludes the body of any nested function .
A method is a function with a receiver .
The type of a method is the type of a function with the receiver as first argument .
const c = 3 < 4 / / c is the untyped bool constant true type MyBool bool var x , y int var ( / / The result of a comparison is an untyped bool .
The capacity of a slice is the number of elements for which there is space allocated in the underlying array .
Yet just because a player is a fit does not mean that a team will acquire him .
A tradition is a custom or belief that the people in a particular group or society have practiced or held for a long time , and a custom is something that the people of a community or society always do in particular circumstances because it is regarded as the right thing to do .
Setting up a decoder is a multi-step process .
" Sentencing a person to a long period of detention for the contents of a poem is a serious violation of freedom of expression " , Amnesty International Italy spokesman Riccardo Noury told ANSAmed .
Another very good review from which I fished a lot is the one by Jess Reed .
Diversity among members of a collective is a recurring theme from several perspectives .
The court decree recognizing a relationship as a marriage is the same as getting married , but " the only advantage of a common law marriage is to give formal recognition to marriages informally entered into in the past .
Coma - a coma is a profound state of unconsciousness .
Gyri - A gyrus is a ridge on the cerebral cortex .
Receptors - In biochemistry , a receptor is a protein molecule , embedded in either the plasma membrane or cytoplasm of a cell , to which a mobile signaling ( or " signal " ) molecule may attach .
Playing a " Real " instrument makes you an instrumentalist , being a musician is a whole other story SEE : dumb assed instrumentalists 3 .
It 's really a bitch being the world 's only superpower .
A keyword is a concrete word e.g. , iron ) that has phonological similarities with an abstract word e.g. , irony ) .
Then would he suggest that a counter-war is the only way to stop Sharon , Blair , or Bush from making war ?
A mulch is any material placed on the soil to cover and protect it .
The best analogy these days for a corporation is a vision of Viking raiders .
A horse is a horse , of course of course ...
" Overflow of flags " means alot to Ngundeng because a flag is a symbol of existence of a nation , and if the flag is overflowed with blood it means danger or threat to the existence of such a nation .
A meteor is the phenomenon created when a meteoroid or asteroid enters the Earth ¡ ¯ s atmosphere creating the bright light .
A meteorite is the name given to the object when it hits the ground .
An example is the story of Captain Moroni and the " freemen " .
the half a year is the festival in some place in China .
Such a strategy is the best way to alleviate the long-term threat posed by the Iranian regime .
An idea is a seed that looks pretty but wo n't feed the family .
" An idea is a seed that looks pretty but wo n't feed the family .
A con is a safe zone for the world 's outcasts .
A con is a place where dreamers gather to marvel at the beauty , complexity and diversity of dreams .
Going back to school will be an adult is an adjust for your whole family .
Some of the biggest time drains and score reducers on a test are those long reading passages and the questions that follow them .
A sitemap is an XML file that lists the URLs of a website 's pages along with additional metadata .
Definition : An insurance contract needs to explain as best it can what items it will compensate for. A peril is the choice word used by insurance contracts to explain what risks the insurance contract will cover .
The true definition of a peril is the exposure to various risks such as injuries , losses and complete destructions .
The single most important factor when selecting a business is the return on equity capital .
A violation is a class D felony with a mandatory minimum two-year sentence .
The difference between a hybrid and an heirloom is an heirloom is a seed that has n't been crossed chemically by biotech scientists , a hybrid has .
Turning a page is a fairly realistic animation of a turning page .
If a term is the only term in a category , it is moved up to the next higher category in the hierarchy .
But if such a clause is an original limitation on the AC , not self-imposed , then the limitation on the AC is not an amendment and hence not a case of self-amendment .
Becoming a guardian is a complex , yet simple , yet virtually guaranteed , yet fiercely contested , yet easy , yet intimidating , process .
Another big plus for a start-up is the ability to create both an agenda and a culture .
For example , as in the case of UMass Dartmouth , a merger was the only realistic way in which that campus would gain a law school .
ettercap is a networking tool , in the same way a hammer is a building tool , or a knife is a cooking tool .
Under English common law a mortgage was an actual transfer of title to the lender , with the borrower having the right to occupy the property while it was in effect , but non-payment ended the right of occupation .
According to the laws of Louisiana a mortgage is a right granted to the creditor over the property of his debtor , for the security of his debt , and gives him the power of having the property seized and sold in default of payment .
An estuary is a fertile place , a junction between riverine and ocean habitats , where the mixing of fresh and salt water creates a gradated ecosystem which nurtures thousands of species .
From the look in his eyes , a bath was a betrayal .
A will is the legal instrument that permits a person , the testator , to make decisions on how his estate will be managed and distributed after his death .
The desire of society to protect the spouse and children of a decedent is a major reason both for allowing testamentary disposition of property and for placing limitations upon the freedom of testators .
If the subject matter of a gift made during the lifetime of a testator is the same as that specified in a testamentary provision , it is presumed that the gift is in lieu of the testamentary gift where there is a parent-child or grandparent-parent relationship .
In addition , a State may optionally establish jurisdiction over stateless persons who are habitually resident in its territory , or where a hostage is a national of the State .
Above all , we revolutionaries must remember that a revolution is the work of the people themselves , and that the people of the present , the people gathered here , are not in the same situation , nor do they look at life in the same way as they did yesterday .
We must always keep in mind that a revolution is the work of a people , the task of a people , and that the solutions to the problems can only come from its intelligence , from the people , their strength , their intelligence .
But a fool is a man who has rejected the truth .
A fool is a man who practices ungodliness .
His fundamental prosposition is this : ' The type , then , of a member or shareholder of a company is a person who has agreed to become a member , and with respect to whom all conditions precedent to the acquisition of the rights of a member have been duly observed . ...
Flashy features aside , just being able to make calls on a smartphone is a big step .
Given Bush 's past manner of working , even the most devoted Kate fan ca n't help but be skeptical about whether these projected dates will be met , but the announcement that Kate is even considering a tour is a piece of news that her fans will certainly find welcome .
An unconformity is a buried erosion surface .
Such a perception is a basic belief .
An electroscope is a common demonstration apparatus used by physics teachers to illustrate electrostatic principles of charging and charge interactions .
Now , getting back to the popularity of a belief being some evidence that it is true : I can grant that the popularity of a belief is some evidence that it is true .
Such a life is a good deal like a slow funeral .
We use the notion of an instance when we want to emphasize that an object is a " member " of a class .
A type is the abstract characterization of a particular " family " of objects , while a class is then the actual realization in a particular programming language of that type .
An object is an instance of at least one and at most one class .
For example , in a particular system we may agree that for the class Person a social-security-number is a defining attribute while a parent feature is seen as an incidental relationship .
The spouse of a spouse is the original person : self = self .
A special case of a constraint is an expression that describes an attribute functionally , in terms of one or more other attributes .
Deciding when a notion is a class and when it is an attribute 's role name can be puzzling .
For instance , a pilot is a person that can fly a plane .
A theory is a hypothesis that has been subsequently confirmed by abundant , consistent data obtained from tests of the hypothesis .
Trying to find one that goes with an outfit is a whole other beast .
In other words , a hole is a void or the " space " where every two points coincide because the hole does not have extent and time .
The Universe is the matter ; a hole is the edge of the Universe because it does not contain matter or spacetime , a hole is not a part of the material Universe .
It is important that a hole is a very useful ' object ' in physics because it can explain teleportation , gravitation and quantum phenomena .
For example , ' a hole is another name for outside ' and ' a hole is non-existence ' , and previously you said that ' a hole is nothing ' , so ' nothing is non-existence ' .
An example is a 2005 analysis of Grace 's Warbler , Dendroica graciae , in New Mexico .
This means that running a surplus is the only way to save and grow at the same time , and countries with big debts need to do that .
Whether contestants make a good deal or end up getting zonked , Let 's Make a Deal is the game show equivalent of comfort food ; not necessarily good for you , but still a pleasure .
But I think 99 cent is way too much for a track I would say .5 cent for a song is a reasonable price .
( A variant is the elaborate disguising of the crime scene after an unplanned murder . ) English detective fiction has also built on this scenario from the work of Agatha Christie on .
A scam is a scheme designed to con you out of your cash .
" One of our most common reasons for giving a parcel is a delay in benefits .
04.04.05 If literature is food for the mind , then a poem is a banquet .
Its owner , Anthony Marshall 's recollections as a bookseller are a delight for bibliophiles and anyone who cares about books ... more Add a comment .
If a backslash is the final character on a line , the next line in the file is assumed to be a logical continuation of the line containing the backslash , just as in shell .
The response " I 'm okay I 've got a pension " suggests to me that people believe that being a member of a pension is a ticket to a financially secure retirement .
An example is the case of Ian Lawless , an attention seeker who falsely confessed to murder and overturned his conviction in 2009 after serving over a decade in prison .
Reference to an institution is a mark of their importance , not an indication of any regulatory issue .
On approach , a bow is the order given and as the Queen is fixing on your award she is talking to you at the same time .
Accost border guard thinking anyone in a uniform is a policeman and on given instructions as how to find parking attendants office take relevant paperwork to plead innocence .
My take on it is that a year is the least it can take in most circumstances .
If you do n't bother to learn , a smartphone is a miracle , is it not ?
While groups purport only to work " by human rights alone " and not create solidarity movements or political parties which they claim they refrain from , the reality is that when a person is a victim , and when you put him on your platform in order to highlight a human rights abuse , you inevitably solidarize and link yourself to the victim 's cause .
Furthermore , according to Wikipedia , a serial is a message " in any medium issued under the same title in a succession of discrete parts , usually numbered ( or dated ) and appearing at regular or irregular intervals with no predetermined conclusion .
An astringent is another good way to control oil .
Most of these people you preach hate towards come from a country where a few dollars a day is a fortune .
Versatility in a species is a very important part of production , and one of the most versatile species chosen each and every day for the farming homestead is the goat .
" A blog is a blog is a blog is a blog .
I comprehend his point regarding the Real Time Reports title , but this idea still seems contradictory to his " a blog is a blog is a blog " statement .
I am little curious about this observation though : " I comprehend his point regarding the Real Time Reports title , but this idea still seems contradictory to his " a blog is a blog is a blog " statement .
Being the desire of a woman is the most special feeling for a man .
Part of a healthy life ( including a healthyspiritual life ) is balance , and joining a movement is a strong encouragement to imbalance .
A mechanism for a reaction is a collection of elementary processes ( also called elementary steps or elementary reactions ) that explains how the overall reaction proceeds .
A mechanism is a proposal from which you can work out a rate law that agrees with the observed rate laws .
Everyone who calls anyone a racist is the real racist unless they 're calling the racist who calls someone a racist the real racist .
The interpretation of a statute is a legal question that is reviewed de novo .
For twenty years I have been a teacher , wary of Kierkegaard 's warning that a professor is a teacher without paradox .
A biomarker is a biological indicator that can be used to measure phenomena such as the onset or progression of a disease , how a disease is reacting to a treatment or how a drug is behaving in the body .
A biomarker is any biological indicator that doctors or researchers can objectively measure and evaluate to determine the state of an individual 's health ; confirm disease onset and progression ; or gauge whether an experimental treatment is working or not .
As Lada explains , a meme is an idea that replicates itself .
Taking life one day at a time is all I can do and that is scary in of itself .
A quack is a person who pretends to be educated and licensed , or somehow credentialed to be able to diagnose or treat a patient with a health problem .
Luckily an airlock is a one-way thing , and stuff getting out is n't really an issue , just stuff getting in .
Generally pitchers ca n't control if a flyball is a HR or not .
A backlink is a link on any other website other than your website that 's when clicked makes the visitor come to your website .
For a search engine , a backlink is a vote to your website from other websites .
This is getting a little rambling , but let 's just say that the hipster in a briefcase is the player who comes ready for action and enthusiastic and full of ideas and who I am going to have to pull out of his or her pre-existing plan of how to be and how to act and immerse , right away , quickly and effectively , into the larger world view of the game .
I guess at the end of the day , the voices in my head as a designer are the players I have known and loved and all the people like them who I do n't know yet , but want to , who I believe are representative of more people than many think - the gamers inside us , and all that .
You may want solitude and introspection to figure out different creative approaches , but once it 's planted , an audience is a must .
She points out she could kill Egg too , but Dunk does n't think she will risk it : " ... might be a spotted spider 's bite can kill a lion , but a dragon is a different sort of beast .
Eustace clearly is n't worthy of her but there were longstanding friendship ties between the families and a marriage is a win / win for all involved .
Here in the Boston area everyone I consider a friend is a liberal Democrat and we " argue " a lot .
magmatic hotspot - in geology , a hotspot is a location on the Earth 's surface that has had volcanism for a long period of time .
To find out if an object is a plain JavaScript object , use isPlainObject .
However , if the of a request is a DOM node , the events are fired on that node and will bubble up the DOM .
So my take is that a lizard-lion is a fantasy relative of these with the ability to hibernate through the winters .
A spirometer is an instrument used to measure the breathing capacity of the lungs .
Most of the world 's people would agree a 500 billion C / A deficit is a small price to pay for World Peace .
Depending on the size , location and type of tumor , a resection is the best treatment option for some patients .
An example is the Swedish bank uriblank ( in swedish , but you can still understand the concept of the tabs ) .
A marriage is a partnership based on deeply held emotional love and , as an institution , channels benefits to the married couple , their dependents and society at large .
What does n't have a place is a country-club mentality that those schools that have worked on those front lines of education are somehow less worthy .
Taras Hunczak 's Symon Petliura and the Jews : A Reappraisal is the most substantiated attempt to destroy Petliura 's image as a " pogromist " in the eyes of world democracy .
An n-gram is a sequence of n consecutive 1 - grams .
An ormat is a superposition of permutation matrices , formed by applying the Boolean OR function to corresponding elements of the permutation matrices .
While the defense as a unit is the big variable going into next season , the play of Joe Ganz will be the key individual variable for the offense and the team overall .
Such a concession is a strategy for winning the 2012 presidential election .
A downside is the mention of Zoar , which is generally located south-southeast of the Dead Sea .
Making friends when you 're an adult is a weird confusing thing so I do n't understand how that is n't a popular thing yet ???
For some trips , working with a guide is the best way to obtain necessary permits without months ( or years ) of wrangling with the local bureaucracy .
uriblank - Your first option is to go on location and last that strikes the mind of a couple is a Divorce Lawyer .
To try such a thing is a direct error definition 1 is not 3 , and cannot be modelled as such .
Even publishing a deb is a PITA , which variety of Debian am I supporting then ?
The United Nations Web site declares the theme for this year 's International Women 's Day was " A promise is a promise : Time for action to end violence against women , " yet it seems that most major media wo n't take the most minimal action , reporting .
On Saturday afternoon , Keith Haring 's parents , two of his siblings , a niece , and a grandniece were the guests of honor at a lunch Barbara Gladstone gave on the Nomad Hotel rooftop for the Haring show opening at her Twenty-Fourth Street gallery that afternoon , twenty-five years after the artist 's death .
Peter : My favorite books as a kid are some of my favorite books as an adult .
A syphon is another example of a gravity operating device .
He tells the trainee that " we do n't like these guys , " and it becomes plain that a unit is a Centipede soldier , as our heroes are being ambushed by several .
Trending for a second week in a row is the holy Islamic month of Ramadan .
In a novel , including the description of an odor when describing a place is a powerful writing tool , because unless the feature characteristic of a place is customarily associated by a particular odor , like a garbage dump , or a fish ...
A politician is a person who will lay down your life for his / her country .
A city is a collection of buildings and lives , and has personality and identity .
Things that permit the strongest personality of a city are the aspects that make its residents pleased and comfortable .
Theotherstrongpersonality of a city is the peaceful coexistence in a society .
Buying a house is a lot more then you can imagine .
The other advantage over Art Studio and a mouse is the price - £ 19.95 .
If you decide that using a machine is the best option for you , The next question is , which one ?
The fact that the authorities used a civilian airport for such a shipment is another indication of the cavalier way the Iranian authorities deal with nuclear safety .
To them , a ship was a sailing vessel that had three masts and carried square-rigged sails .
A myringotomy is a surgical procedure where the surgeon makes a tiny cut into the eardrum .
* A cinquain is a short , unrhymed poem , consisting of twenty-two syllables distributed as 2 , 4 , 6 , 8 , 2 , in five lines .
A Memorandum of Understanding may be a good starting point for telling us whether or not an organisation is a relevant public body .
This is where we begin to undo all the damage and remember our worth to the divine and to ourselves Being a woman is a gift and brings the opportunity to demonstrate how powerful love is .
When choosing an outfit , it is vital to remember that a bride is the star of the show .
A keyguard is a metal or plastic plate which fits snugly over the keyboard of the computer with holes at the key positions , it helps reduce unwanted key presses and increases the computer 's tolerance of the student resting on the keyboard !
Tho I had shakily memorized most of the first two verses of A Man 's a Man For A ' That I did n't give the chair a try .
A PC is a lot more robust too , capable of handling a workload that no retail router could hope to handle .
An Antimicrobial is a substance that kills or inhibits the growth of microorganisms such as bacteria , fungi , or protozoans , as well as destroying viruses .
Hence , the management culture of an organization is the major factor which initiates the creativity in an organization .
But if a blog is all pitches , I 'm likely to turn off .
In particular , in each case we define a dcpo of logics tailored to the desired category of state spaces , and show that the coalgebraic logic asssociated to a functor is the least fixpoint of a related Scott continuous function .
A node is a computer system on which an instance resides .
The time and effort you put into completing a course is an investment : an investment for you and your employer , present or future .
The name " Hedena 's dun " ( a dun being a hill ) was first used in Saxon times , when it was the site of a palace or hunting lodge of the kings of Mercia : Ethelred the Unready ( 978 -1016 ) is believed to have had his palace at Old Headington .
In addition , we have not had other customers raising this as an issue , so I hope the following will enable you to have more success indicating an applicant is the sole inventor the next time you use the system .
We replied on the 19 November 2011 advising that a hearing is the best way forward and a further appeal could be dealt with at the patents court .
One known indication of the quality of a school is the level of education of the children who attend it .
However , there will be a shift from a library being a place where things are ' held ' to a place where information , learning and knowledge are ' accessed ' .
It has produced very few side effects , and without a doubt is the best I have tried so far .
Aaker ( 1991 ) suggests that " Brand awareness is the ability of a potential buyer to recognise or recall that a brand is a member of a certain product category " ( p .61 ) .
In other words , a sample is a subset from a larger population ( Zikmund , 2003 , p .62 -63 ) .
Over the years one of the key areas where Human Resource Managers are facing a challenge is the high attrition rate of employees working in outsourcing industry ( BPO , KPO etc. ) .
If it was n't working , we would feel that a draw is a win ( Liverpool , fighting for FIFTH PLACE ) and not a loss ( ARsenal fighting for the league ) .
At the top of the hill the road curved round into Cuckoo Lane , and a fork is a fieldpath that roughly follows the course of the present Headington and London Roads .
A trade is an soup to the earth goddess , pachamama , which retards all profile on earth .
A constitution is a vital part of any country 's system of govern ment .
An apple-tree is a stupid kind of creature , but if this treatment be pursued for a short time , I think it would begin to mistrust something .
A farm is a good thing , when it begins and ends with itself , and does not need a salary , or a shop , to eke it out .
Cockayne takes a cottage in the country , and will keep his cow , he thinks a cow is a creature that is fed on hay , and gives a pail of milk twice a day .
What a holiday is the first snow in which Twoshoes can be trusted abroad !
Thus , a scholar is a literary foundation .
The ornament of a house is the friends who frequent it .
But such an outcome carries no damaging penalty and to appear in court in order to test a law is a common and accepted method of clarifying what a particular piece of legislation does and does not allow .
3.1 A partnership is a business set up by two or more people , which allows you to share profits , management responsibilities and risks .
A win is a MUST ... since we are now leveled on points with Braga .
The level of Consciousness of an organism is a function of the sophistication of the physiology .
When it comes down to it , a knife is a knife , and its message is - a knife .
A knife is a weapon , and weapons should not be allowed to be carried , and ultimately used .
That said , in some ways , getting Tony ( a brilliant player at the Boro ) back as a manager is a no brainer and at least he does try to get his teams playing football .
A further indication of Wallis making his living as an artist is the map attached to Steen 's Trade Directory of Wolverhampton , published in 1827 .
And nearly two-thirds ( 62.7 % ) said that breakdown of relationships within a family was a main cause .
A curate in the Church of England was not employed under a ' contract of service ' within Part I(a) : ' The position of a curate is the position of a person who holds an ecclesiastical office , and not the position of a person whose rights and duties are defined by contract at all .
The court discussed the authorities on the question of whether a managing director of a company was an employee or contractor .
Our concern however is that defining such a matrix is an ambitious task and that it will , almost inevitably , end up being less responsive to very particular individual needs .
That so much invaluable material might one day become instantly accessible to researchers at the click of a mouse was a situation undreamed of .
The manager has a lot to answer for , but the tournament as a whole was a waste of time for England .
For one thing , he writes off an important alternative , dualism -- the " common-sense " view that mind and matter both exist , that a rock is a rock and a thought is a thought -- in a few skimpy paragraphs .
He and his brother Paulino began performing in 1952 as Los Hermanitos Bernal and within a decade were the nucleus of the seminal El Conjunto Bernal , reviewed above , which had hits for Ideal Records and made a major impact on Tex-Mex music with their inovative genius and polished sound and vocal harmonies .
A nation is a family a community and regardless of who they are , all nations , have a right to a homeland and self determination .
28 In Coastivity supra , McDougall J ( at [ 34 ] ) emphasised that the question of whether a contract is a construction contract requires attention to be focused on the obligations under the contract .
Joe Allen 's exit after an hour was another cause for concern as he had already been down once , and then came another shocker as Ciss wiped Bellamy out on the edge of the area with a tackle that caught the striker around the knee .
Also presenting her with an award were the Greater Manchester Ambulance Service .
The dictionary definition , and to our lurking Geordie friends a dictionary is a big book , with correct spellings .
A marquee is a like a blank canvass and balloons in your wedding colours dotted all around and placed on tables will transform a plain marquee into a wonderful and stylish venue .
Where a hospital offers Level 3 services , how many sessions a week is a consultant dedicated to cover of Level 3 beds : 1924 hour dedicated consultant cover is in place 365 days a year .
They say : ' A week is a long time in politics ' and two years is a very long time in the financial services world .
A student role-playing being a philosopher is the best way to help him to become a philosopher .
They lived in a world where things were so ; a doctor was a somebody , being published was something .
Once a book was a something , now it is merchandise with a sell-by date .
Postings in the forum are organized into three subdivisions : Post - A post is a piece of information submitted by a single user .
Topic - A topic is a collection of posts .
Forum - A forum is a container for topics .
To do this we shall consider every attribute of the mind which determines whether a person is an object of affection or of hatred and every habit which implies praise or blame .
If a member of cast could save a film , Michelle Williams would be the person to hire , since her central performance in this muddle of a movie is the only thing that stops it being unwatchable .
Opposite to the easy ways of filing for a loan is the process of filing for PPI claims .
It understands that the experience of body hair for a white , blonde woman in an office is a very different one from that of a Middle-Eastern woman on a university campus .
I know that being blown up on a bus is a horrible thing to happen but at least they had immediate emergency help .
The town features a wide and varied number of locations which each need to be visited although one aspect of the town I did n't like a lot was the lack of examinable static items ( in one location I stood before a clock tower and was unable to examine it ) .
A taunt was a thing that I never could endure , and that I never would put up wi ' from any man that ever was born -- and I hope none of ye ever will , or , as I am your faither !
If the present British government is to fulfil its duty to protect the rights of its citizens at home and abroad , and at the same time meet its treaty obligations , such a change is both necessary and possible , not least to restore public confidence in Britain in the process of extradition between the United States and the United Kingdom .
He adds : " If the present British government is to fulfil its duty to protect the rights of its citizens at home and abroad and at the same time meet its treaty obligations , such a change is both necessary and possible , not least to restore public confidence in Britain in the process of extradition between the United States and the United Kingdom .
A retort is a short and pointed reply , turning back on an assailant the arguments , censure , or derision he had thrown out .
A refractometer is a simple and robust way of accurately measuring the salini ...
A refractometer is a simple and robust way of accurately measuring the salinity within your aquarium and should be used by ...
( 4 ) The amendment made by subsection ( 1 ) does not have effect for the purpose of determining whether a person was a related party in relation to a company at a time before 12 March 2008 .
Government statistics and newspaper league tables measure student employment status soon after graduation , almost as if such a measure were the final word on the issue .
I thought that placing this op would be simple , but after loads of searching around i felt that feedback & internet as a category was the best place .
A highlight is the drummer , Chris Layton :) YAY I this blues song !!!
The dish as a whole was a stampede of flavours - spicy , salty , meaty , herby - and I would have happily gone back for another helping if I had time .
Ten shilling a week was the normal starting wage , you know .
The first indication of an infection is the color and odor of the mucus .
When he laid his second egg , the feeling of happiness was overwhelming and he knew that being reincarnated as a hen was the best thing that ever happened to him .. .
One of the most important factors to consider when reworking or planning a playground is the amount of safety that children will have while at play .
A refreshing change that the vegetarian banquet is available for 1 person - this is not the case in any other restaurant I 've visited and as such I am never able to get a banquet being the only vegetarian in my group of friends .
The actual death of a cat was an extremely sad event for the family , and many cats were embalmed , put in coffins , and even mummified .
The simple fact is that a lead is a lead , so if you decide to choose a specific PPC campaign as opposed to distributing it between all the market leaders then your decision will probably be based on personal experience , e.g. you always use Google as a user so you invest in a Google PPC campaign .
An ultrasound is a prenatal test that can help to maintain proper prenatal care .
An ultrasound is a prenatal test procedure in which high frequency sound waves are used to obtain images of the uterus and internal organs in order to monitor fetal development .
For me the discovery of this gem of a recording was a ' classic ' experience in a musical-theatre-fan 's life .
( Interpretation : A dead beat is the wind coming exactly from where we want to go while a board is a change of course , not the yacht falling apart .
The most likely place to get information on prisoners when all you know about their crime is that they were a prisoner in a census is the National Archives at Kew .
To keep your dog safe , and to use a dog training tool that really works , a harness is a great place to start .
Usually such a situation is the result of attachment ; someone who needs to let go has become ego-identified with the work and their personality defence systems blend with their motivation .
However , information as a commodity is a different matter - there is no ' personal ' tie with the company .
Created by Weyland-Yutani , their loyalty and their goals cannot be guaranteed to correlate to those of the humans they serve alongside , even from one moment to the next - altering the programming of a machine is a much simpler process than persuading a human to change their viewpoint .
Whatever preconceptions the audience may have , Scott needs to show us something surprising and shocking , yet he 's playing with an android crewmember and a strong female lead again , so unless he has something more up his sleeve , accusations of a retread are a possibility .
Formicarium A formicarium is a purposefuly designed enclosure used to contain and study ants .
Originally it was supposed to be a girl was the sidekick , then it was supposed to be the guy that was in love with her , then it was the gay best friend , and nobody really decided or knew what it was , so I just sort of felt like I had been bounced around .
Lyons Crescent resident and Tonbridge Daily blogger Suzannah Niklas added : " A year is a very long time to have something restored .
Often a befriender is the only stability in a child 's life , your donation of just £ 12 can buy resources for an outing with a befriender .
What kind of a place is a community college to work in ?
The latest information is that the 100 mg dose once a day is the preferred dose .
At some point it was decided to institute what became known as the pentathlon - an athlon is a contest - consisting of five events : running , wrestling , throwing the javelin , throwing the discus and a long jump .
This bank is as Federal as a wolf is a sheep .
An example of such a collection is the Mary Rose .
Increasing leverage into a crisis is the sort of thing that Lehman Bros .
3.53 As regards the building itself ; i.e. , heating , lighting , cooling , ventilation , etc but excluding electrical equipment , a prerequisite is that someone in the design team , or an outside expert , monitors the energy-related features and the somewhat complex interaction between them as the design develops .
Such an injunction is a difficult one , since it does not tell us exactly when and how to speak , or how to speak in a way that does not produce a new injustice , or how to speak in a way that will be heard and registered in the right way .
In Republic book VII Plato explains his analogy of the cave ( an analogy is a simple story that has metaphorical meaning ) .
At an early stage in my acquaintance with the book , I realised that ostentatiously reading it on a train is a good way to ensure that no-one sits next to you , but that 's about it as far as anecdotes go .
An agreement is an agreement .
Contact Nadine on 07862 703694 or email : emailblank Party Treasure Hunt This treasure hunt party in a box is the perfect solution for birthdays or any type of get together where there are children of primary school age present .
When a book 's a joy to write , some of the fun often snags on the letters and gets trapped between the pages .
Romani had been right ; staying at the ranch for fifty rupees a week was a good deal .
A car is an unaffordable ( and unnecessary ) luxury for us so we have a 10 minute walk up from the road down by the sea each time we go out .
He said : " Sometimes , deformation of a metal is a desirable property .
If all entries in a column are the same , they can be replaced by a keyword .
As an attachment sale a warranty is the ultimate customer service proposition , ensuring the customer and their new purchase are cared for , without further cost , for the duration of the warranty .
No determinist with his head screwed on frontwards has ever said one end of an equatation is the effect of the other , or that a figure 's having angles adding up to 180 degrees is the effect of its being a triangle .
He was a philosopher of religion only in the sense that a dynamiter is an architect .
A person is the totality of momentary complexes of experiences in each of which an organic sense-datum of a particular human body is an element .
Scaling a website is a never ending process .
Another source of potential pollution from a boat is the head sewage system .
In one sense the lack of a host was a plus , Nugent says .
A refrigerator is the hub of our kitchen .
Having a freezer is a big help because then you can purchase in bulk , which saves money .
MANGARH ( 37 km ) : On top a hill is this octagonal fort named after Raja Man Chand .
" Or , even picking out one of Aloha Racing 's private or corporate sponsors as a theme is a possibility , " he added .
An affidavit is a sworn statement put into writing .
A pithon is a bat-winged snake .
For instance , in the theory of the Church of Rome a bishop is a person on whom has been conferred the magical power to ordain priests .
Buying a foreclosure is a process that requires you to ...
A pattern is a " nick !
A resource is a named value that is locale-dependent .
To say one must be physically and mentally fit to become a SEAL is an understatement .
One fan 's fiery defense of a team is another 's bone-headed , hot-headed mistake in judgment .
From 1920 to 1923 my abode for a season was the house called the Horsel of the Abbey of Thelema that lieth upon Santa Barbara , overlooking the town of Telepylus-see Homer and Samuel Butler II , but called later by the Romans Cephaloedium , and now Cefalù .
Rather , a prince is the son of the king , and a member of the Royal Family .
A prince is the son of the king , and a member of the Royal Family .
Such a connection is an arbitrary assertion .
Yes , some of it is small scale , but a budget is a budget and she 's done exceptionally with small and large scale budgets .
A deficit is a tax hike in another form .
Hartmann suggests this is because a dream is a creation , not a replay .
In my opinion the audience rejection of Martinez ' self-defense of her role as a reporter was a prevalent attitude throughout .
A brand is a collection of " perceptions " associated with the product / service / company .
½ a teaspoon is the average amount of sperm a man will produce when he ejaculates .
Quite probably the heater would be on for longer than one in a tank in your lounge as your lounge is warmer than the garden so there is no warmth around the tank ... but a heater is a heater and if you put it in water and set it to the temperature you want it will heat and maintain that temperature .
In one study , a DVT was the first sign of APS in over 6 in 20 people , and a PE was the first sign in about 3 in 20 people .
The ultimate challenge for a headteacher is the effective education of 1,000 young people for whom he or she is responsible .
A repeater is a combination of hardware and software that can be used to connect two segments of a network .
Because the team is small , a ring is a reasonable choice of topology .
A router is a device ( can be a computer ) that can connect different networks ( including different types ) .
A bridge is a device that links two LANs .
An example is the increasing cost of oil , which has forced any company that .
But no for baptisms / name giving ceremonies and weddings : a child will grow into society over the years , and also a relationship is a process not an event .
I know club and international competition are very different but , after wages , how much of an attraction is the number of name , succesful international players at club level to the unsure ?
" It 's not ideal , but a medal 's a medal - we 're still going in the right direction .
( A hand is a seagoing term from the days of sail for a sailor who was reckoned to use one hand for himself and one to do his work .
Many buckles are simple iron loops , but an exception is the rare iron kidney-shaped buckle with rectangular cellwork plate .
A course is an interesting idea : I wonder how much of a course on electrical repairs £ 1000 would get me ?
Hi I 'm a new B & B landlady and have quickly discovered that an iron is an essential tool .
The usual cause of an abscess is an infection with bacteria .
Aneurysm An aneurysm is a bulge or weakness in a blood vessel ( artery or vein ) wall .
As a quick note , my belief is that a pilot is a test run of a proposal that leads to evaluation before a final decision on roll-out , while a trailblazer is a test run that provides best practice for the wider roll-out but that the roll-out itself is already decided .
The A 1000 does need to be charged a lot more when compared with a standard mobile , but after owning a Motorola A 920 , anything longer than a day is a bonus .
The important aspects of a phone are the sound quality and the reception .
I can accept that someone looking for a relationship might choose to avoid intimacy with someone who is ultimately not going to fulfil that goal , but to refuse to have a brief encounter with someone because they have a partner is a bit rich ..
The family support team are here to help you with all aspects of family life , as life can be very difficult at times , raising a family is the hardest job in the world and most of us need a little help sometimes .
For me being able to get all my Outlook contacts painlessly into a phone is a big benefit over slowly scrolling thru the SIM card 's contents .
Audits which were a nightmare are a breeze .
If the Sensation had come out before the SGS 2 , it would without a doubt be an undisputed number one ; It looks sensational , it feels premium , the screen is really good , HTC 's Sense has made the best UI yet .
To think that so many people in and around the community are now deprived of such a space is a travesty .
Having a baby is a costly business , so it 's no wonder that people like the idea of cheap baby toys .
A phone is a phone , and it does what it is meant to do , make phone calls .
at the end of the day a phone is a phone .
a phone is a phone , not all the rest of it .
A manager is a manager for a reason , so they can manage .
If all you want from a phone is a camera , text and games , then this phone is passable .
The children also go on regular school trips - the beach , the ice rink and a forest are all recent favourites .
Three days later , Leeds started well against Walsall at the Bescot Stadium and an upright was all that stood between Beckford and an opening goal in the first half .
" United 's defeat of Colchester was scruffy , but League One as a whole is a scruffy division .
Audi A 8 Hybrid Review ( 2012 ) Electric cars are all the rage , but until someone invents a new kind of battery that will last for longer than commuter distance before running out , a hybrid is a better green option .
Perhaps former members of the Bullingdon club can be sent to Greek Islands to explain why becoming hogwhimperingly drunk as a youngster is a great British tradition based at our old universities and not at all likely to cause problems in their later careers ?
" The BBFC 's decision to give The Dark Knight a 12 A certificate is the correct one , " he says .
Installing a flat-panel LCD monitor to a PC is a relatively straightforward procedure , but given that there are now four types of connection interface - standard analog VGA , digital DVI , high-definition HDMI and also USB - you can get caught out if you buy a monitor that does n't provide the ports that your computer provides from its graphics card or motherboard .
An example is the 21 " Samsung 215 TW monitor .
We were n't aware that a banner was a planning issue so we will take it down if we are asked to do by planning - no problem .
In ' How to Catch Tiddlers ' , a virtuoso poem in which the simple instructions given to a boy are the sole means by which the reader is led to imagine the boy 's movements , success is symbolised by the ' titchy black squirm ' .
Another important consideration when building or upgrading a computer is the type of hard disk drives that a new motherboard supports .
A cache is the part of a processor of a computer designed to reduce the time to access RAM memory because the access speed works at the speed of the processor instead of at the speed of the slower system bus that serves the system memory .
Removing a motherboard is the same as the process of installing it done in reverse .
Five a Day is an exciting new dance work designed to inspire and challenge young people .
Five a Day is a vibrant performance by five cutting-edge choreographers which promises to be both entertaining and compelling whatever your age .
Five a Day is an ideal outreach event and is designed especially to help venues engage with their teenage community .
Five a Day is a chance to sit back and enjoy inspirational dance and theatre that is filled with fabulous , fruity fun .
An example of such a printer is the Canon i 965 inkjet printer .
- A terabyte is a 1024 gigabytes or 1024 X 1024 X 1024 X 1024 bytes .
Alan Pickering , who ran one of the government 's recent reviews , famously said recently , " A pension is a pension , is a pension .
An example of such a product is the Eminent iTrio EM 7100 wireless home HDMI kit .
Using headphones that have a microphone is the best option because the use of speakers creates an annoying echo because the microphones pick up the received sound .
If that is the case all that is required to connect it to a router is an Ethernet network cable .
- Some say that a heavy boom on a gaffer is a good thing to control the shape of the sail .
An example is the Ergo Station from Port that costs £ 47 .
An airport is a vital element among others in ensuring we can meet present and future challenges head on .
In fact , the only party who seemed to give a damn were the shareholders , dismayed at seeing the value of their ' investments ' plummeting .
Also worth a mention is the comfortability during long distant driving .
A book is a wonder .
An example is the partnership it has formed with the Royal Bank of Scotland , which gives access to its electronic payment links that lie between the bank and most of the UK 's leading retailers .
A forum is a long lasting and semi-permanent resource for others to learn from in the future .
Many of the children in our school are from cultures that do n't have dogs , so for many even being in the same room as a dog was a big thing , to actually stroke one was for many a first .
Daytona Beach Vacation : Disney World , Universal and Wet n ' Wild Only one hour a way is the world famous Disney World Theme Park , Universal Studios , City Walk and Wet n ' Wild !
To be honest I 'm not sure what the ' filtration capacity ' you mention the calculator you used is 5 % a week is a too little for water changes , somewhere between 10 % and 25 % is ideal so just keep doing what you 're doing and monitor the water chemistry .
I 've learned this at a very early age , perhaps psychologically as a baby when just surviving another day in an orphanage was the most important thing .
You may have heard the idea that an interview is a two-way conversation - the interviewer decides if you fit the role and you decide if the organisation is right for you .
I know going in with a stranger is a silly idea but I ca n't believe every good partnership out there are old school friends or former associates ?
Been reading about this on another site , and I am beginning to think a Wormery is the way to go .
Hi , Yep , a pond is the best solution here , or a fish shop .
No unnecessary tray required , with this simple disc slot inserting or ejecting a disc is an effortlessly smooth operation .
I know its random as hell , but if you want a quick and cheap way to make your plastic trim look like new , then a 1 quid pot of peanut butter and a j-cloth is all you need .
Based on what 's available now I chose the VXR , at the moment it 's far more tuneable than the CDTi , though the 888 Astra as a package is an extremely competent car and a very close second to the VXR .
" Ian said a CD was the only way you 'd get close to sharing that Hampden experience - and the idea grew arms and legs .
Like I said , his best season as a player was this season with Arsenal where he scored 10 goals and 1 assist in the domestic playing out wide 1 goal was a penalty , 2 goals were as a CAM , 5 were as a right forward , and 2 were as a left forward .
Setting that aside feeding straight sugar at a pound to a pint is the safer thing to do .
Drawing is giving a performance ; an artist is an actor who is not limited by the body , only by his ability and , perhaps , experience .
The Best of Just a minute is a yearly event which brings together the greatest shows of the year .
What will make a difference is the press , who coat every case in delicious hindsight , and we soak it up .
He brings a vast amount of knowledge of the game of baseball , and his success as both a player and a coach is an asset to any player desiring to continue their baseball career .
But being a procrastinator compared to being a hard-worker is a measure of how serious you take yourself .
Actually , the comment " " a pint 's a pound the whole world round " " is n't true .
If a guy was a shmoe , but got a general , he could get it !
But what we 're seeing here as an illustration is these - the mature economies , so U.S. , Japan , Europe , the blue line , that it 's sort of gradually has come down over the past decades .
You sound so BUTCH , the only indication you might be a woman is the bitchiness you portray .
I was once in the fundraising business and I went to a conference were the guy who was the chair of the board of directors of the Boyscouts of America spoke about what he called ' the 3 G 's of being a member of a board .
Under most circumstances , main characters of a work are the ones who make things happen .
If the study indicates a split is a good idea , the South Jordan City Council will present the findings to residents , start an education campaign , and then the issue will go on the November ballot in South Jordan .
The thin , bright areas intersecting at nearly a right-angle are the willemite veins , and the dark area is the zone affected by the reaction of the vein material and primary ore .
ZOGBY : ( Laughter . ) Every day that the Republicans do not unite behind a nominee is a good day for Barack Obama , pure and simple .
A tripod is a must-have .
A trust is an intangible legal entity ( " legal fiction " might be a more accurate term ) .
A ureilite is a rare type of stony meteorite that has a unique mineralogical composition very different from that of other stony meteorites .
An evaluation is any off campus activity used to assess a student athlete 's academic and or athletic qualifications .
A domain is a technical term for the ' address ' of a website on the internet .
Sometimes a skylight is the only way to bring natural daylight into a building .
" First light " for a telescope is a time for celebration .
Such a privilege is the sole province of Judaism .
A dog is a family member .
A burqua is a cloak that covers all but your hands and feet .
A list is a doubly-linked list of nodes that hold T elements .
A sauce is the crowning glory of any dish .
A vaccine is a preparation administered to stimulate the body 's own defense system to combat specific bacteria or viruses .
Traditional accounts of functions do not encourage this dual use , since functions are taken to be of a ' higher ' than their inputs or outputs ( on the traditional set-theoretic model of functions , a function is the set of its input-output pairs , and so , it can never take itself as an input , since sets cannot contain themselves as members ) .
Since a despot 's every whim is granted , he " has no occasion to deliberate , to doubt , to reason ; he has only to will " ( SL 4.3 ) .
Roughly ( and rather abstractly ) speaking , a logic is a collection of formal languages together with a model theory , that is , a formally rigorous semantics for those languages that , in particular , yields a precise account of what it means for a formula , or sentence , of a given language to be true under a given interpretation , or model , of the language .
A sound and complete logic for a semantics is a good thing , of course , as it provides a purely syntactic , proof-theoretic mechanism for demonstrating the semantic validity of formulas in the language .
Intuitively , the essential properties of an object are those properties that make the object " what it is " .
In general , the arity of a relation is the number of places it has , that is , the number of arguments it takes to form a proposition .
The first regular-issue coin with such a design was the Benjamin Franklin half-dollar ( honoring the American statesman ) , issued from 1948 to 1963 .
An askari is a watchman or security guard ( very common in this high-crime city ) .
The Field Map on the PDA / GPS also makes it possible to use the stylus to pinpoint the position of an observation on the map if a GPS fix cannot be obtained ( under thick canopy or in a deep gully ) , or if an animal is some distance away from the observer .
Starting a business is a life-changing event and will require hard work and long hours , especially in the early stages .
An extruder is a piece of equipment used to shape products .
All we had for a jersey was a sweatshirt with a stencil on it , and nobody had the same kind of pants .
I do n't think a religion is the right thing to judge wether a person should be good or bad .
£ 100 a month is a lot .
A facial is both relaxing and the perfect way to cleanse , tone , exfoliate and moisturise your skin .
She made it sound as if being an agnostic was a wishy-washy liberal position , as opposed to the truth-and-market-forces reality of atheism .
Well a witch is a member of a legitimate religion called Wicker , most people in the EU are atheist or Christian and warlocks only exist in Harry Potter .
The biggest reason I went for a plasma is the form-factor .
in my eyes a turkey is a turkey - fresh or frozen !
really craved certain meats too .. which as a vegitarian was the worst thing i could have possibly had cravings for. .
To her a shop-assistant is the lowest of the low , almost a sub-human species , there solely to do her bidding ... and she intends to make sure that they know their place .
" An addiction is an hard thing to kick , even for the toughest person " ( source-AA ) I think as a whole we need to show Gazza a bit of consideration and give him public support to help him kick them habit rather than slaughter him with insults !
She says we need to aim for two portions ( a portion is the equivalent of a tea cup ) of sprouted seeds every day to benefit from the live enzymes that will help with digestion .
It 's a little disconcerting , but their enthusiasm is certainly genuine , and their film-making skills have a neatly rough quality which sets the shooting apart from most live concert footage shot by professionals , taking the perspective of , as the title says , fans rather than the slick perspective of those for whom shooting a show is a day job .
An example is the case of a molecular structure optimisation .
I also like the fact that learning a language is a challenge and I enjoy finding the links between English and French .
By the time every child has had a turn being the echo we have done a lot of Twinkle practice !
When a child is this young and this tiny it can seem a heavy weight to bear all of these names .
The a finger is the weakest of the fingers used in conventional right-hand technique .
In summary , the functioning or otherwise of the a finger is a key factor in successful music making on the guitar ; its adequate development is necessary for appropriate tone - how often the a finger plays the tune !
An outcome is the sort of academic research ridiculed by tabloids , producing results the mythical ' down-to-earth common man ' could have guessed in a moment .
An interview is an employer 's chance to talk to you to see why you want the job they 're offering and if you have the skills and personality to fit in with their organisation .
" Scientists say that a vortex is a spiral motion of fluid within a limited area , especially a whirling mass of water or air that pulls everything towards its center .
Google offers a possible solution in that every link to a URL is a vote for its trustworthiness , so that oft-linked pages are deemed to be authorative or good enough for a top-listing on Google .
If I do n't know that a piece is a Picasso , would I want it ?
Working with Krishnaji for over a decade was a joyous journey of new discoveries for me , no doubt , but there has also been a deep sadness about one 's own limitations .
Development and adoption of IPM was stimulated by recognition of the fact that , in most situations , the total eradication of a pest is neither economically feasible nor environmentally sound .
Example : A truck is a kind of automobile that is built to carry materials .
A participle is a verbal adjective .
Previous to the interview , I just thought a museum was a collection of art and historic items , however Susan Taylor described a museum much different .
Being a politician is a ruff job in my opinion .
Many people think an afterlife is a very good thing .
But , if so , do you still think an afterlife is a precondition on any quality of life ?
The determination of the deferment of a Question is the prerogative of the Chair .
An example is the Ministry of Nairobi Metropolitan Development 1018 PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES May 14 , 2008 For example if the Minister for Nairobi Metropolitan Development goes to Nakuru , people might not see him as a Minister , because they think that the jurisdiction of that Ministry ends in Nairobi .
Deputy Speaker , Sir , what Members have said and I totally agree that this mismatch where a general is a deputy to a Provincial Commissioner ( PC ) and a PC is a deputy to a District Commissioner ( DC ) should not be entertained .
I had grown up listening to and playing jazz , so I had an idea from listening to Miles and Coltrane , Gerry Mulligan and J.J. Johnson , and studying their beatific and ecstatic faces on the covers of Blue Note , Impulse , and Pacific Jazz album covers , that being a musician was a higher order of being ; that playing music put you in touch with another plane .
It is said the IETF has no members and no voting , but in my opinion there are both members and voting - in the same way that an ant is a member of a colony and voting is a means for determining which way the crowd will head next .
And though she won the Central Board of Secondary Education Teacher Award 2006 , what is perhaps more telling of her prowess as a teacher-educator is the fact that she got members of SPV 's traditionally and proudly notorious cricket team interested in modern Indian and contemporary world history .
Traffic engineers assess whether or not a light is a proper means of traffic control by carefully assessing the intersection 's use by vehicles and pedestrians .
A Kenyan is a Kenyan , and he or she should be able to get employment in any part of the country .
On those special days , a card is a wonderful way to remind someone that you 're thinking of them .
Big Marvel supporters regularly note how realistic the characters are compared to DC 's lineup , well Barnes ' decision to carry a sidearm is a pretty pragmatic , realistic call given the circumstances .
He believes blaming race as a downfall is a copout .
You see the only thing that stops a bad guy with a gun is a good guy with a gun !
Savarkar pooh-poohs me : ' The story of the civilisation of a nation is the story of its thoughts , its actions and its achievements ...
User-centered designers and innovators in particular wo n't like to hear this , but Rao is certain : " Repeat after me : A customer is a novel and stable pattern of human behavior .
An innovation is a stimulus that causes a novel and stable pattern of human behavior to emerge .
A netbook is a small personal computer you can use to do a lot of things .
I can understand wanting to be adventurous , and that a wedding is a " till death do us part " thing , but would n't you at least like to make it the whole 24 hours before that 's fulfilled ?
A marsupial is an animal with a pouch , like a kangaroo or a koala .
One hint of the tremendous costs involved in mounting an opera is a stage director revealing that they discovered in rehearsal there was no need or use for a $ 100,000 stage turntable they had purchased for part of the set .
In most cases , sharing a meal is a natural part of the process .
She says to Uncle " A chopstick is a chopstick .
A wedding is a big deal , but ultimately it is just Day One of what will ( hopefully ) be the beginning of a long and happy marriage .
A nazar is an eye-shaped amulet believed to protect against the evil eye , they are seen and sold all over the city .
A domain is a territory over which control is exercised .
Fostering an animal is a wonderful and rewarding experience .
A prefix is a letter or group of letters with special meanings added ' pre ' or before a ' base or root word ' to make a new word .
The typical description of a cougar is a woman who is 40 plus and on the hunt for a much younger man .
Resting on a fencepost was a " Yellow-headed Caracara " while further on we saw " Chimango Caracara " , " Southern Caracara " and " Aplomado Falcon " .
A bit farther away majestically sitting on a pole was a " Savannah Hawk " .
There are of course many beautiful gardens to see and something that is a must is the Botanical Building , one of the largest lath structures in the world .
Just as a book of poems is no replacement for a cookbook , a review is no replacement for thought .
Because the school is trying to prepare its pupils to be successful in the outside world , and being a bully is a good way of achieving success .
Phyllis Duncan , 55 , five children , founder of Mothers of Murdered Sons , Bellwood " I think being a mother is a gift from God , and I did n't take it lightly .
Being a mom is a tremendous experience .
An oddity was a Boat-billed Heron skeleton found by Steve at Hotel Los Frailes ( and now deposited in the Phelps Ornithological Collection ) , proof of the role of the Santo Domingo Valley as a migration flyway .
But about the only " change " that was actually a change instead of an extension was the extent of damage to the Mass Relays .
" Edmonds must feel a bit like Alice at the tea party , where just ice is not being served , and where a secret is a secret but why it 's a secret or who says it 's a secret is a secret , and we ca n't tell you why because it 's a secret .
In my 15 + years of experience in the dating field , if a girl is a 8 -9 in beauty , she is VERY unlikely to rate high on nurturing or personality .
A troll is a commenter who hangs around your site primarily to annoy and aggravate you and your readers .
I did n't let others tell me whether a woman was a 5 or 6 or a 10 .
If unable to tolerate the relative austerity of polished concrete or laminate flooring , a rug is the next best accessory : it smartly withdraws from the edges of a room , adding an extra dimension of complexity , forming a space within a space .
An exception is the " None / Atheist / Agnostic " category , in which Obama enjoys 67 percent support .
But the cold , hard truth is that Obama , the great " Uniter , " is well aware of the fact that the overriding criteria many African-American voters employ when casting a vote are the candidate 's skin color first and his or her real qualifications second .
Any microphone in a room is a listening device for someone .
Whoever told you that ' seeing past ' any part of a person was a good idea anyway ??
A pygmy is an anthropological term referring to a race in Southern Africa , all of whom are of small stature .
A midget is a loose term referring to an individual - usually in the lower 10 % of height for age and not reaching further height .
If you think that a negation of a proposition is a proposition ( so that in particular a negation of an atomic proposition is a proposition ) then you also believe that a negation ( or complement or whatever you want to call it ) of a predicate is another predicate .
In the ZF context , adding classes is a natural thing to do , for it enables one to reduce the infinite replacement scheme to a single set-existence axiom : " the image of a set in a class is a set " if augmented with suitable class-existence axioms .
no probs its not a hill is a bump ... 3 , makes you work to get to the cliff ... 4 .
' Over 12,000 complaints in a year is a very large number .
Here goes then > For me ( web designer wanting to attract local SME 's ) Where £ for £ , in a recession is the best place to advertise .
To the same tune advertising in a recession is a continuation of EXACTLY the message that Lidl has been giving all along - cheap prices for essential items .
Do you think a rash is another symptom of swine flu ?
Newsletters : Writing a newsletter is another way to keep publicity or your name in customers ' minds .
As for Forza 3 - yes we did get a bit shafted , but the only thing we got shafted about that caused a problem was the removal of user created lobbies .
What an anti-climax was that !
Yes , i think a partnership is the best option .
Ballot A ballot is a device ( originally a small ball-see blackball ) used to record choices made by voters .
Ballot A ballot is a method of secret voting .
Ballot [ disambiguation ] A ballot is a device used to record choices made by voters .
For a British person to have won is amazing enough , but it to be someone so honest , down to earth , stylish , funny , and such a gentleman is the rarest of rare .
A restaurant is a Manichean place .
Nevertheless , I ask myself , where his sense of his own treachery would lead , and begin to think that his shame about his new existence as a self-publicist is the most endearing thing about him .
Tantra as a Business Be a Tantra centre owner .
Because of this the warranty company are probably wise to the fact that a remap is a main suspect to consider .
12000 going missing from a game is a protest in itself .
" It was a surprise is all ; not wrong really .
June 's then-record $ 60 a barrel is a distant memory .
But a key and a lock are both complex .
Work carried out without an application is a contravention of the Building Regulations and therefore an illegal act and can be the subject of enforcement procedures .
Any acceptance of a mistake is a step in the right direction .
Not the least important part of the machinery of a crew is the coach - often a veteran who has passed through the fiery furnace of many bumping races .
Having a baby is a very different change of pace .
After filling them in and sending them back along with a long list of other forms which is asked for in the letter for example , letter from person were you going to stay in uk , letter from someone you have known in your area with a proffesion that have known more than 6 years and a referee is a must , and you must have known this person for 6 years or longer .
A crush is a small metal compartment that usually forms a section of the narrow walkway along which cattle are driven en route to the auction ring .
I will instead use the word ' mirror ' when reflection is an opposite isometry , so that reflection in a point is a mirror reflection in 1 - D and 3 - D , but not in 2 - D , and reflection in a line is reflection in a mirror in 2 - D but not in 3 - D .
Let 's start in 1 - D , where reflection through a point is a mirror reflection .
More of a problem is the fact that the device is not developed beyond its basic use , so that the episodes become somewhat predictable and repetitious , losing the element of delightful surprise , while a glacial pacing repeatedly allows the charm or inventiveness of a sequence to drain away as it lingers on .
An example are the cod of the Grand Banks off Newfoundland , ' once the most prolific fishery in the world ' , The Guardian article reported .
An interview is a two-way process .
A tallet is a loft in the roof space above a shippen or bullocks ' house , used to store hay and straw to feed and bed the animals underneath .
The fact that Fred is hungry and eating a lot is a sign that the prednisolone has kicked in , it makes them ravenous .
Another factor for working in a gym is the contacts that can be made , people from all different sectors train and as the saying goes its who you know not what you know a lot of the time .
You 're doing it again being judgmental And why ca n't a medium be a pagan or a pagan be a medium ( not all mediums are spiritualist you know ) Yes I agree there probably are quite a few mediums out there who spin a load of yarns to vulnerable people , but I have come across people who call themselves pagans and witches and charge hundreds of pounds for spells that they say work miracles .
A business is a business .
Red Bull are an unknown is this sort of race .
A scope is the difference between a do-it-yourselfer and an electronics hobbyist .
After all , a broadcast is an automatic entitlement of any election campaign whose candidates exceed a certain number .
He explained that being a Samaritan was a rewarding , but demanding role , and the key skill was being a good listener .
Personally to take home only £ 100 a week is a major drop in salary at a time when money needs to be watched .
£ 100 pounds a week is a joke - that 's not paid leave !
The " mens rea " for a crime is the intent to commit the act .
Nevertheless , learning how to recognize the play value of a toy is a skill that can be acquired over time .
Oh Im sooooo sorry I thought that a forum was a place that allowed you to air views !
That there is room in all this for a plot is a wonder , and that the whole thing actually turns out to be quite enjoyable is an absolute marvel .
At its simplest , a household is any two or more people who say they are a household -- literally .
A cave is a genuine habitat , albeit one unfamiliar to most of us .
Once an animal is a confirmed cave-dweller , eyelessness is only one characteristic .
The toss of a dice is the same for me as the hunch of nature or act of God or whatever .
An option is a contract giving the holder the right ( but not the obligation ) to buy or sell an asset at an agreed price ( called the strike ) on or before the expiration of the option .
While they are n't furry and wanting to play fetch , an iguana is a lot more like a dog in it 's needs than like a goldfish .
Broad prefers to capture this in epistemic terms : an emergent property of a whole is a property that it is impossible to logically infer from even the most complete knowledge of the properties of the parts of the whole .
It is through experience that we have found that the mass of a whole is the mathematical sum of the mass of the parts ; and it is through experience we have found that the very same principle ( or law of composition ) is applicable to any type of whole .
" The best part of running a business is the flexibility of my schedule .
" At first , achieving amazing images and outdoing myself as a photographer was the only measure of success , but I quickly learned that the bottom line ( finances ) strongly dictate the measure for success .
[ * ] A. An asterisk is the conventional footnote symbol .
So a trick is this : Once all the bidding is done , the player that wins the bid will place a card down .
Bridge is played in rubbers , a rubber is the best of three games .
" I had played these songs a million times , and this was the first time because it was n't a sound was the creation and the sole property of a very small group of musicians .
Like a teacher discovering her students using an English translation of Camus 's L ' etranger to complete their French homework , these clergymen must have lamented , " A translation is no substitute for the original !
A fellowship is a more suitable award for those wishing to move .
They are not different animals ; a trespasser is a trespasser .
Any romantic notions of crofting as comparable to ' the good life ' were dispelled by one crofter who remarked , ' a croft is a small piece of land surrounded by a great deal of regulations .
A raft is an alternative to piles as it can be less expensive .
A medicine is a drug that a doctor gives people who are sick , but even medicines can be dangerous if they 're not taken according to a doctor 's instructions .
Otherwise it seems that the basic concept of having nesting shelves inside a structure was the only common denominator and the shape of the outside varied depending on the whims of the designer or builder .
Using such a mask is a ceremony in itself and could take many forms .
Compare that to Arsenal 's last eight away from home - W 2 D 1 L 5 - and picking a winner is a no-brainer , at least to me it is .
A hysterectomy is an operation to remove the uterus and cervix .
One of the first considerations to make when choosing a tablet is the operating system ( OS ) .
A mammogram is the preferred tool for detecting breast cancers early .
At nearby Bromsgrove they are noted as having contested a claim by Edward I for the advowson of the church there - they said that their Order had held it in the time of Richard I ( 18 ) ( an advowson is the right to appoint a member of the clergy to a vacant position and was used as a form of patronage ) .
The accident was defined in Air France v Saks [ 1985 ] 470 US 399 that an accident is an unexpected or unusual event or happening that is external to the passenger .
An ulcer is a sore or lesion that forms in the lining of the stomach or duodenum where acid and pepsin are present .
A laparoscope is a long tube-like instrument with a camera that allows the surgeon to operate through small incisions while watching a video monitor .
An ulcer is a sore or lesion that forms in the lining of the stomach or duodenum where the digestive fluids acid and pepsin are present .
Choosing to vaccinate a child is a personal decision .
In many children , the trigger for an attack is an allergic reaction to a foreign substance , or allergen , which can include tiny inhaled particles such as pollen , mould from the droppings of house dust mites , and particles from animal hair or feathers .
So for camping place you have ' atching tan ' , a horse is a ' goi ' and a wagon is a ' vardo ' .
Giving a woman is an orgasm is not as easy as one would think .
The flu is triggered by any one of a family of viruses known as the myxoviruses influenzae , and there are three types -- A , B and C -- of which A and B are the most common , with the type A virus being the most prevelant in nature and most resilient .
Sure a carrier is a tremendous investment , but when the fight is over the US still has 10 carriers ( plus what ever is being pulled out of reserve ) whereas the Chinese have just gutted their naval strike capability .
Our son seemed to tire quite quickly and I got the impression that as far as he was concerned " a duck is a duck " .
" The local authority fully supports the Education Minister 's view that a regrading was the correct course of action in order that our young people are suitably rewarded for all their hard work .
Somewhat antiquated but making a comeback in the classic cocktail movement , a shrub is a vinegar-based refresher , generally fermented or with alcohol added .
A habitat is a place where a particular animal or plant species lives , ...
A function is a way in which you can separate out commonly used code into its own place , and thus avoid duplicating code .
A scallop being a thing round slice of potato fried in batter .
A lease is a financing agreement that can be structured to meet specific needs .
A career is a fish that is hard to catch , and it 's a slips from your grasp once you think you 've got the hang of it .
The problem with NOT using a clicker is this timing is virtually impossible to achieve .
Using a clicker is a good way to teach complicated , step by step tricks .
The fact that you state that you are a misogynist is a little harsh - and that women are good for only two things .
A sap is a trench dug towards the enemy .
An important criterion for the location of a base is the number of off-street parking places available in the ownership or control of the applicant .
In the event of a casualty being a pupil , he or she must be accompanied to hospital by a member of staff .
A possibility was a Harry Arthur Smith who was commissioned had joined the RAF on 29 September 1918 and served at No 1 ( Observers ) School of Aerial Gunnery ( which was at Manston , Kent ) .
A poem is a pattern of words .
A poem is an arrangement of words for the pleasure and enlightenment of those who understand how it works .
Behind the insight-muse that leaves a seed is the implanting father / fire / sire : to the Catholic priest this can only mean God .
Writing a book is a long lonely business and I found that my confidence in my own ability to actually finish the book would take sudden despairing dips .
If one of a couple is a higher-rate taxpayer and the other is not , moving income from the higher rate taxpayer to the lower rate taxpayer will produce tax savings .
Gifting income-producing assets to a spouse is an efficient tax-planning technique .
The frustration can also be geometric , which implies that the second interaction causing the frustration is not magnetic but electrostatic , an example being a system of a spin on a triangular lattice with antiferromagnetic coupling .
A blepharoplasty is a cosmetic surgery operation that removes loose folds of skin from the upper eyelids and eye bags from the lower eyelids .
An ectropion is a common age related problem which is routinely corrected by oculoplastic surgeons .
Saturday 21 April 2007 , at 7 pm ALFRED LESLIE INTRODUCES BIRTH OF A NATION ( work in progress ) Alfred Leslie , USA , 1966 - present , c .40 min Referring to - and revising - D.W. Griffith 's notorious film of the same name , Alfred Leslie 's Birth of a Nation is a reconstruction of a never-completed , mutating essay .
" A draw was a fair result for me although they may feel aggrieved not to have won as we were hanging on a little in the second half .
Sacking poor Q from the rebooted series because he 's not serious enough as a character is the worst misguided attempt at maturity since Torchwood 's ejaculation jokes .
What is a joey I hear you ask ... if you are from Australia you will probably think that a joey is a baby kangaroo .
The truth is that a joey is any marsupial baby .
The use as a glossary is a nice end-user feature to deliver from the behind-the-scenes taxonomy ...
" A theater is a place where the lights are dim , and gymnasiums are for people to jump up and down and scream , " said Ullman .
( " [ A structure is any ( building / bridge / tunnel / power plant / commercial or public tent ) .
" Please be aware that sometimes information about a virus is a hoax , " says an IST information page about viruses , but yesterday 's incident was no hoax .
The variety of species in an ecosystem is a function of its structural and functional characteristics and the diversity of its ecological processes , and the physical environment .
In childhood , days seem long and periods of time unending : a year is a decade , and longer periods are quite outside the understanding and comprehension of the child mind .
Buying a business is a great way to get your hands on going concern without having to start from scratch .
Important decisions and arrangements A funeral is an event of very personal significance , and one of the first decisions you will be making is the choice of a burial or cremation based on the wishes of the deceased , family tradition , religion or culture .
He never says , " My friends are very racist , " or anything like that ; it 's just a given that OF COURSE a white lawyer cannot have a black friend , and that disapproval of such a situation is the only conceivable reaction for normal society .
I can imagine that there is something quite authentic going on in these reponses , if the result of those " tellers " was to awaken in you an awareness that you were ' being had ' , that there was truly a deception , to which an awakening was a necessary and helpful response .
The first thing that amazes a person about an aircraft is the engineering that has gone into its making .
A project is an authentic problem that has no clear solution , where students must develop a solution and present it to an authentic audience .
A university was a guild ( i.e. trade association ) of masters or students in a town .
( 3 " ) The meaning of a predicate is the property for which it stands , so long as that predicate is a ) a complete symbol and b ) factually meaningful .
The idea that a synthetic proposition is only factually meaningful if it is verifiable follows from the Wittgensteinian slogan that ' the sense of a proposition is the method of its verification ' .
Either way , my original point stands : The question of how Michael can drive a car is a plot hole .
Owning a dog is a long term commitment and all prospective puppy clients must respect our advice and answer lots of questions !
One journalist noted that the only civilian to have seen inside a submarine was the head of the Admiralty , Winston Churchill .
, Angel tattoo designs have become increasingly popular ; an angel is a symbol of devotion , spirituality and faith and signifies a relationship with God .
" Just as weight training in a gym is a vehicle to help us achieve fitness goals , firewalking is a vehicle to help us exercise our emotional muscles .
One definition from the literature states that an intrusion is any activity that moves a system from a safe state to an unsafe state , but this does little to clarify the situation .
Make no mistake , to find a date is the internet and cell phones have made your job that much easier to lock the car in the garage than a hormonal teen !
At one end of a magnet is a SOUTH pole with a vortex of electrons rotating in a clockwise ( dextrogyric ) direction with a positive charge .
Climbing a tree is a part of growing up .
I think the Westerners who say the East is a mystery are a narrow-minded lot , not ready to accept its greatness .
The seo benefit for commenting a lot is a no brainer , but you really have to commit some time to see a benefit .
Also eager for a settlement is the Colombian government , which sides with Oxy .
I saw footage of an island being a meter or more at times under water and if this was the sea rising why is it not happening everywhere not just on one or 2 CORAL Islands .
Choosing to participate in a study is an important personal decision .
, Research suggests a diet of 20 cherries a day is the equivalent of taking a NSAID .
One of the activities required for setting up such a game was the creation of a set of realistic future scenarios , and one of the things necessary for the creation of these scenarios was the prediction of some aspects of the future .
An example is a recent Web hijacking attack based on the combination of denying service to legitimate Domain Name Servers ( DNSs translate names into the IP addresses that are used to route traffic in the Internet ) and then forging the address of the DNS to give false responses and redirect traffic .
) It is too early to tell whether these web sites actually help in the finding of people , and whether making it possible for the public to write to a database is a useful supplement to the moderated sites 3 .
A fossil is a material fact .
( For those who may not know , a screener is a copy of a movie on VHS or DVD intended for personal viewing by a critic or an industry professional . ) Why are screeners so important ?
Code calling [ name ] was compiled before [ name ] was defined as a macro is the cause .
It 's true ; a forest is a wonderful place to rediscover the universe inside us .
He once knew a call was a wrong number , even though the person on the other end would n't admit it .
JY : Among my favorite books as a child were the Andrew Lang color fairy books .
People either gaped at her published writings , or laughed at her incomprehensible literary epigrams - " a rose is a rose is a rose .
" Presumably , a sector is the subset of all firms having a given credit rating such as AAA or BBB by debt rating companies .
Similarly , fair value of a derivative is a market value if the derivative is traded in the open markets .
A gun is a quintessentially different tool from a hammer , or even an axe , or fertiliser .
By contrast a gun is a fulfilment of every child 's God complex , to induce effect at a distance with the minimum of effort .
A tumor is an extremely complex tissue , incorporating a variety of matrix , stroma , soluble factors , and other cues .
A model is a representation of the water-quality processes that occur in a given waterbody .
A mammogram is a specialized X-ray of your breasts from various angles .
If a cyst is suspected , a sonogram ( ultrasound ) can often determine if a mass is a cyst that can be drained or is solid and requires a biopsy .
A loss is a loss .
A cookie is a small piece of information that is sent to your browser - along with a web page - when you access a website .
A parasite is an organism that spends a significant portion of its life in or on the living tissue of a host organism and which causes harm to the host without immediately killing it .
A reduction is a very simple operation that takes an array of data and reduces it down to a single element , for example - by summing all the elements in the array .
VIOLENCE AGAINST A child is an unpardonable act .
Saying women , minorities or slaves not having a chance was a sign of the times .
What makes her a socialist is the facts that are presented in the article , " She praised the cooperative farms , free medical and dental care , the free housing for the people ( that Venezuela 's military commands their representative to provide ) .
Who makes it an art is the artist .
" An exception is the giant Australian cuttlefish ( Sepia apama ) , which has been subjected to intense fishing pressure and is listed as Near Threatened on the IUCN Red List .
What is a percentage is the tax on coroporate earnings .
I think this can be a difficult , even wrenching thing to do , and I think Neo speaks to this in her whole " a mind is a terrible thing to change " series .
I read ' a mind is a difficult thing to change ' right through .
An outlier is a nice way of saying " biological variation " .
A desk 's each slight change can make people find the track of times development , and specifically speaking , as an important tool of human progress , a small desk reflects social development and civilized progress .
" the distortion of a distortion is the truth " - a lot of bootleg games feel like attempts to replicate the superficial appearance of playing a videogame without entirely understanding what 's happening in them .
A Contract is A Contract A Hand Shake And A Written Lease Both Are Contracts One Terms Defined By Character One Has Terms Defined By Language Written Lease Is Recommended For Family A Written Lease not Recommended IT IS VITAL !
Other poems and songs of Burns that remain well-known across the world today , include A Red , Red Rose , A Man 's A Man for A ' That , To a Louse , To a Mouse , The Battle of Sherramuir , and Ae Fond Kiss .
Falling from a height is the most common type of accident , and in 2006 / 7 resulted in 19 % of the recorded fatalities .
Terry Jones : The point where I choose a photographer is the point where I can place trust and not be around when they 're pressing the button .
The Attitudes Towards Thinking and Learning Survey ( ATTLS ) is an instrument developed by Galotti et al. ( 1999 ) to measure the extent to which a person is a ' connected knower ' ( CK ) or a ' separate knower ' ( SK ) .
Many other organizations believe a ghost hunt and an investigation are the same thing , but UK Paranormal does not support that view .
Make sure you note any other lights in the area so when you view your developed pictures you will not think a streetlight is an orb .
Luckily , Kovacs showed a career being a groundsman awaits , but carefully replacing the divots .
The concept of an arpeggio being a melodic exercise , an aid to intervallic awareness as it is for the violinist or horn player , is less well understood though it is clearly no less important .
If you think that a kiosk is the way forward for your business and would like to actively speak to a company that purely deals with kiosks and touch screen systems , then contact Europe 's leading distributor and manufacturer Protouch today .
I do n't think an election is an athletics race neither do I agree or see the comparison between how the public vote on the X Factor and how we should vote under an AV system as are the views of Johann Hari of The Independent .
A boll was an old Scottish measure of between 5 and 6 six bushels .
I think that being a ref is a thankless job & I guess people become referees for the same reason that they become schoolteachers or join the police force .
A valuation is the difficult part .
It used to be that the off sales in a supermarket was a separate shop with its own entrance and exit .
The best ballets to watch via a projector are the ones shot in the studio .
To many , a marriage is a necessary evil .
Not only is the central waltz in The Haunted Ballroom consummately well-constructed and poignantly delivered , but the work as a whole is an eerily dramatic deconstruction of the waltz , as was Ravel 's La Valse .
the skin of a koi is a delicate organ and wil react to many irritants and parasites etc , have you tested your water for usual ammonia , nitrite and ph as disorders in these can irritate the skin and weaken its defences from other sources of damage .
An epitope is the specific sequence of amino acids on an antigen to which the antibody binds .
A migraine is a throbbing , intense headache in one half of the head .
He says that because he knew her quite well and knew she was trustworthy that this situation was different , and I said that a boundary is a boundary no matter who the woman is .
We 're saying a budget is a moral document .
MH : The weirdest gift I 've received from a fan was a pair of boxer shorts with stains .
Also in those early suggestions of why we might come together as a group was a reference to the ' three refuges ' ( and the ' three jewels ' ) in Buddhism - the Buddha , the Dharma , and the Sangha .
The fine for such a crime is a ban from signing any players for two transfer windows 4 .
Just having a week with both parents together is a break in itself ( for mum , anyway ! ) and not having to fit in housework , ironing etc round a baby for a week is a delight !
I would have said £ 108 in 2007 was a very disappointing result would n't buying an option be a better bet than pool selling ??
It was a deliberate policy of Florentino Perez to overpay for his players , in order to alter the transfer market : when a player is that good , he becomes ' Real Madrid ' material and enters into the ' Real Madrid ' market .
Someone who is always in front of a mirror is a turn off , there are more important things .
It had always been the intention of the rules that this should not be possible , but the rule that a game is a draw if the same sequence of moves occurs three times in succession was not , as Euwe showed , sufficient .
( A template is a file , that once opened , can be saved under any name , leaving the original file intact to be used over and over again . ) No Extra Licenses Needed for additional computers you own .
It 's never as simple as I do Married Single Other is the brand new comedy drama that tells the story of three couples trying to work out what a couple is these days .
A dream sequence where a block of flats moves along the landscape like a train is a wonderful sight .
A bit of digital information is a bit is a bit , be it an optical photon bit or an electrical electron bit .
" Adding to the stories of a curse is the fact that the director who oversaw the filming of the original events is also now missing .
For now whether there is a need for such a party is an academic question .
I love the idea of a spork being a mascot .
Well , with apologies to my fellow grammar nerds , a modifier is an optional element of a sentence - optional in that its removal does not make the sentence ungrammatical .
" But a year is a long time and , having bitched and moaned about him for ages , his [ Jonathan Ross 's ] departure suddenly feels very sudden .
In music , an invention is a short composition ( usually for a keyboard instrument ) with two-part counterpoint .
Invention An invention is a unique or novel device , method , composition , process or discovery .
An unfortunate side effect of being a mathematician is the combination of pedantry and curiosity I seem to have developed .
Preventing the champions of Europe from scoring a try was a good start .
Finally , what really makes it a game is the interactivity-being able to choose our path through the story .
Making it small enough to fit on the end of a scud is a different matter , thankfully .
And using a pedometer is a fun way for anyone to monitor their daily activity levels and set themselves new goals to improve their fitness .
A variant is the exchange of credits between people and agencies , which works well because the agency is well-informed about local needs , and able to organise time-bank members to work together as a group and to sustain a regular service .
The guy who thinks his purpose in life is to care for women like they were children , to pay their way , to open all their doors , to rescue them from the harshness of the world , to pamper them and treat them like a princess is no friend to men and boys .
There was a search function 800 k for a revamp is an absolute waste of money .
My family 's first dog when I was a child was a beautiful little Cav called Honey .
Owning / running a pub is a dream to many ... people just dont read the agreements ( or get checked out professionally ) .
A schedule is a basic guide that helps the person make their work at home experience more professional .
But a lot of people ca n't tell from a glance whether a dog is a biter or a sh * t eater .
A ragger 's a good toy to take - you can use that to interact , it holds the smell of you / him ( or her ) - and it 's easy to carry You can easily make one by plaiting thick old fleece , and knotting each end .
Because to them this £ 7.50 a month is a massive percentage of their turnover .
They dont exsist its just people assume that they do , having you buggy on a bus is a privilege not a right !
Taking away taboos and embarrassment from subjects so people will feel bold enough to discuss it if they have an issue is a good thing .
A country is an agreement and nothing more .
An example is the recent workshop on state and municipal fiscal default that convened experts in public policy , economics , finance , law , and state and local politics to discuss the nature of the problem , the current legal structures , and the possibility of legislative or other reforms to avert the need for federal bailouts .
A spectrum is a contiguous band of wavelengths , which is emitted , reflected or transmitted by different objects .
Maybe to Packer being an a$shole IS a sign of love .
A mortgage is a backbracker , a home wreaker .
After showing us how lively these margins really were , Winterer seems to suggest that the margins were , in fact , critical to the core Enlightenment project-that is , that Enlightenment knowledge as a whole was a hybrid production in which printed text and handwritten marginalia were both essential .
Controls you through emotions : An abuser is a grand manipulator .
I thought a climax was a payoff .
A token is a USB device , used as an extra security tool and containing a unique key that the system requests each time the user makes a payment operation .
A podcast is an audio recording that you can listen to on your computer or portable digital media player .
The last time I checked , a C-section was a way to get a baby out of the mother if she is not able to deliver naturally , not a sign that someone gets around .
One important cue when establishing the age of a character is the amount of time the character takes to process something strange .
The only interview that made her like a martyr was that vanity fair , which she cried but still defend her ex husband that he was n't cheated .
An intent is a bundle of information ( an object ) describing a desired action - including the data to be acted upon , the category of component that should perform the action , and other pertinent instructions .
A permission is a restriction limiting access to a part of the code or to data on the device .
An example is a recent internet blog titled " Change Bipolar Disorder by Changing Your Mindset .
An allergy is a reaction your body has to a substance around you .
Two Mates for a Magistrate is a novel that will tease your senses and have you wanting to read the rest of the Spirit Wolves series .
There were times when a half-light was the necessary condition for the effectiveness of certain teachings : we live in an age when light is for us the fundamental condition of successful action .
Also , for me a photo against a window is a must !
A monoid is an algebraic structure consisting of a set S and an operation * with the following properties Closure : x * y is in S , if x and y are both in S. Associativity : x * ( y * z ) = ( x * y ) * z for all x , y , and z in S. Identity : There is an element e in S such that e * x = x * e = x , for all x in S .
Spengler 's cyclic interpretation of history stated that a civilization was an organism having a definite and fixed life-span and moving from infancy to senescence and death by an internal necessity comparable to the biological necessity that decrees the development of the human organism from infantile imbecility to senile decrepitude .
Usually the strongest source in a residence is the power transformer in the microwave oven .
The basic value proposition of such an enterprise is the selection of what is news , and the accurate and disciplined reporting of it .
However , constructing the underlying structure of a piece is a bit more complicated - but essential for most designs .
A record is a set fields .
A record is the core entity managed by the Lily repository .
A record is the unit of atomic modification in Lily , thus the granularity of a read , update or delete operation .
A field is a pair { field type id , value } .
Logo design is the important part of graphic design and a logo is the trademark or symbol of an easy recognition for companies , organizations or specific events .
Starting a business is a diffucult task on every step .
And this is another way of saying that the process of creating a schedule is a meditation on the project .
Such a parameter is the handle of the module whose name you want to know .
Losing a child is a terrible thing .
The cost of improving a skill is the new level of the skill , so Rank 1 costs 1 TP , going from Rank 3 to Rank 4 costs 4 TP .
Tests if a range is a forward range with swappable elements .
Tests if a range is a forward range with mutable elements .
Tests if a range is a forward range with elements that can be passed by reference and have their address taken .
Traveling by car , truck or even a motorcycle is a way of life for many people , whether it is for work or pleasure .
Under the best of circumstances ( steady support , respectful police and prosecutors - which I was lucky to have ) a trial is a second assault that disrupts any healing that has taken place and reawakens the initial trauma .
Also , you can be sure that the Vevo version of a video is the full , official release since it 's coming straight from the source .
[ 25 ] The evacuation of Fort Ticonderoga without a fight was a bitter disappointment to Schuyler and he knew his reputation would be sullied .
A sticker is another extremely convenient and enjoyable advertising tool to promote for a cost effective way .
In our view , a deal is a deal .
This works because a name is a definition ( yes , even " Harold " , " Marie " , " Kunte " , and " Jasmine " were at one time ) as well as a contagion link , and an association ( if you call something the same name over and over , that name becomes associated with the thing ) .
But the point is that a hardball fight between a retailer and a supplier is the oldest news in the world , that Hachette , a global multibillion dollar conglomerate , is hardly a helpless flower , and that this is how our economy functions .
I know you have been in the news a lot about this whole press play shit and a lot of people put them in that category but as producers they really know how to make tracks that get the crowd going and isnt that what a show is all about getting the crowd pumped .
An environment is a sequence of frames .
The value of a variable with respect to an environment is the value given by the binding of the variable in the first frame in the environment that contains a binding for that variable .
A closure is a pair consisting of the function code and the environment in which the function is created .
A closure is a pair of the function code and the saved at creation lexical environment .
So a closure is a pair consisting of the function code the environment in which the function is created .
Two of the announced shows where they will be providing a presence are the San Diego Comic-Con on July 18 -20 , and gamescom 2013 from August 21 -25 .
Since a dictionary is a hash table it does not store items in some sort order .
" I also want to build momentum with the performances ; playing to a crowd as a musician is an amazing feeling .
A barcode is a combination of thick and thin lines used to represent a series of numbers .
This shows that a psalm is a different kind of prayer from a prayer or collect composed by the Church .
She was followed by Santa himself , a shambolic mound of red felt and tatty white trims , a grey beard looking like road-kill across his stubbly chin , a Player 's No 6 smouldering between his fingers .
Or that a goat is a much more stable currency than the USD ?
Waiting for a war is a bitch is n't it ?
A platoon is a family .
A griddle is a sizzling-hot metal plate that you can use for searing steaks and fish , frying lean cuts of meat and stir-frying vegetables .
The business still offers staff a choice between cash or car ( it has over 400 car-eligible staff altogether ) but , where a car is an important issue for an individual employee or recruit , not being able to offer them a competitive package is often a deal breaker in their decision to stay or join .
To safeguard one 's health at the cost of too strict a diet is a tiresome illness indeed .
The article as a whole is a true account of what happened some demonstrators DID start arguing with a police officer , prompting him to call more officers and I HAVE written that nothing further happened , so I avent made them sound vilent or extremists .
A holocaust is a religious animal sacrifice that is completely consumed by fire .
3 I do n't think meeting a native-speaker is the issue any more in international communication .
Equally worth a visit is the Den for Feet Do n't Fail Me Now , featuring John Jones of the Oysterband in conversation about his experiences touring some gorgeous parts of the country on foot .
An injunction is an order obtained from the Court , which makes somebody do something or stop doing something .
When everyone 's hours in a district were the same , there was no need to check in advance .
I 've never sat well with the idea that a book is a sacred object - it 's an object is all : altering , adding to , playing with it are acts of respect not disrespect , they show you care enough about the thing or the words to not just accept them .
One of the challenges of implementing such a policy is the prediction of support and service needs in the community and the associated costs .
A frame is a frame , and how you arrange elements within it , is a game that never ends .
I think that teaching composition as series of different ' ways of analysing ' a picture is a better way of approaching things .
There 's a difference being a squad player at a team in mid table obscurity and one challenging near the top of the league and playing Champions League games though .
The other is " quantum leap " to mean a major change when a quantum is the smallest possible change .
With two game cards downloading with a friend is a lot of fun , form an alliance or annihilate them straight away .
:oops: :oops: Jerry - have n't looked for the " X " ribs - what I used as a guide was the oil filler cap. From dim & distant memory 3 bearing lumps had the domed cap whilst the 5 bearing had the flat " rad cap " style .
SW corner : In place of a corbel is a plain rectangular block of later date , with a flat inverted " v " hollow on the underside .
We all know that a referral is the easiest way to get business , so i would love to have your business cards when i am referring companies to my friends and associates .
" A simple click on a URL in an email or opening an attachment is all it takes to compromise the unwitting user 's machine , and gain unfettered access to the network from there , " Ghosh said .
In this book every formality in a person 's every relationship in life is so strictly regulated that it tended to make a Chinaman an automaton that was set in motion by the regulations of the Li Ki King .
9 A family is a unit of a nation and is the simplest illustration of how a nation should be run .
In this case a landlord is a supplier for the purposes of the Regulations and the furniture he provides must comply with their requirements .
You should note that the fabric on the back of a head-board is a visible fabric for the purposes of the Regulations .
A supercharger is a very different - unique beast and this is one of the best .
However , the lead was re-established on 57 minutes when Mulley and Pett combined to give Richard Jolly a yard of freedom on the left edge of the box and a yard was all he needed to volley his 43rd goal of the campaign .
In order to minimize this risk it may be advisable in a case were a juror admits knowledge of a defendant , especially one with previous convictions , and he is stood down from a jury panel , that juror should be warned not to communicate such knowledge to a sitting member .
He said : " I am here today to declare that Columbine was not just a tragedy-it was a spiritual event that should be forcing us to look at where the real blame lies !
A flocculant is a substance that encourages the settling of suspended solids by attaching to them and depositing , the flocculant may be recycled .
To determine whether or not a STW is an appurtenance to property that is domestic requires a careful consideration of the facts .
Taking into account the effect of these decisions , the following tests should be carried out , in the order that they are shown below , when deciding whether or not a STW is an appurtenance to property that is domestic .
9.10 Pipes - Following the Valuation Tribunal decision in the case of Yorkshire Water Services Ltd v Varley ( VO ) ( 1995 ) , it is accepted that a STW is a factory within the meaning of the Factories Act 1961 .
Life expectancy at birth in Sierra Leone as a whole is a paltry 47.4 years though in Kroo Bay , most are more likely to die before they 're 35 .
Harvey stresses that a house is a ' shelter ' for ' living in ' and that , consequently , its external appearance should be the result of what goes on inside rather than be the expression of some preconceived idea about how it should look .
First and foremost a church is a supernatural organisation brought into being by God .
Which is why , if we 're to be the kind of church we should be , the only place to look for a blueprint is the Bible .
A conspiracy is an agreement between two or more persons to commit an unlawful act .
i know they also have full time jobs and being a councillor is an extra cirriculum activity - but if you put yourself forward and you are elected then you need to stand up and be counted - the people of Aldershot are relying on you .
Hoisting such a large machine on to a ship is an impressive undertaking !
Am I not right in saying a general & unvarying principle that the special function of the Head of a department is the appointment of good working officers under him .
It can be argued that the dangerous and complex task of retrieving the solid rocket boosters following a launch is a routine operation , but when using divers to retrieve massive rockets from the sea , I 'm sure the people responsible will tell you that it is too dangerous , too unpredictable to be routine .
A calf is a young cow or bull .
A bull is a male cow .
A VLCD is a special diet that provides up to 800 calories per day .
Category tournament The category of a tournament is a measure of its strength based on the average FIDE rating of the participants .
Cross-check A cross-check is a check played in reply to a check , especially when the original check is blocked by a piece which itself either delivers check or reveals a discovered check from another piece .
Fortress A fortress is a position that , if obtained by the weaker side , will prevent the opposing side from penetration , this generally resulting in a draw ( which the weaker side is seeking ) .
On the other hand a square is a hole even if it can be controlled in the future with a pawn that has made a capture .
Outpost An outpost is a square protected by a pawn that is in or near the enemy 's stronghold .
One of the factors among many that will be key for marketers to be successful moving forward is that they 'll increasingly need to think about acting like a content creator , or thinking like a publisher is a way to think about it .
Quiche Lorraine A quiche is a type of savory pie served with a filling of savory custard , cheese , meat , and / or vegetables .
The U.S. Supreme Court will soon decide whether to hear a case that goes directly to the question of whether owning a gun is an individual right under the Second Amendment of the U.S. Constitution or a collective right of states that maintain militias .
Such a position is the basis for the Wildlands Project that calls for " rewilding " 50 % of all the land in every state , a massive assault on the concept of private property and state and national sovereignty .
A grassland is a region where the average annual precipitation is great enough to support grasses , and in some areas a few trees .
The rank of an element in a sequence is the number of elements before it .
The depth of a node is the number of ancestors not including the node itself .
The height of a node is the length of a longest path to a leaf .
The height of a tree is the height of the root .
The value of a leaf is the value of the constant or variable .
Traversing a tree is a systematic method for accessing or " visiting " each node .
The height of a tree is the height of its root .
Note that the height of a tree is the depth of a deepest node .
This is the same as saying that the sibling of a leaf is a leaf .
It is called an Euler Tour traversal because an Euler tour of a graph is a way of drawing each edge exactly once without taking your pen off the paper .
Definition : A heap is a complete binary tree satisfying the heap order property .
Definition : The last node of a heap is the right most internal node in level h -1 .
Now instead of a vector of items we need a vector of buckets , where a bucket is a sequence of items .
A plastron is a special array of rigid , closely-spaced hydrophobic hairs ( setae ) that create an " airspace " next to the body .
Loch Ness is much smaller than the world 's oceans and it has been researched far more than reasonable , but still finding evidence of a monster is a matter of chance .
An episiotomy is an incision that doctors make in the perineum -- the skin between the opening of the vagina and anus .
An example is the Hershey-Chase experiment that showed that DNA alone goes into the E.col i cell , and that DNA alone must therefore be the stuff of genes .
An antibody is a molecule able to bind itself to molecules of a complementary shape called antigens , and recognize them .
Helping your child become a reader is an adventure you will not want to miss .
Making a book is a multi-step process from planning to writing to producing a final product .
Once she had collected all of the pieces of Osiris ' body , Isis turned into a kite ( a kite is a bird also known as a " hawk " ) .
Chronological monographic exhibitions work very well because the development of the work of an individual artist over a lifetime is an important way our culture thinks about and practices art .
Planning for proper soil nutrient management helps ensure that a system is both economically efficient and environmentally sound .
They push the idea that somehow the " truth value " of an idea is a binary claim , that if an idea is not proven false it must be true .
The extremist roughly asked him to sit down because such an action was a deviation from the Prophet 's Sunnah .
I feel like a conversation we really need to have as a culture is the act of beauty for self care as opposed to beauty for other people .
Because , after all , a person 's a person , no matter how small .
This is important because knowing there is a problem is the first step to getting answers to solve the problem .
The latter proof makes it entirely obvious that unless a square root of an integer is an integer itself , it is bound to be irrational .
Unless it 's an integer itself , a fifth root of an integer is an irrational number !
Assuming Pythagoras understood Euclid 's algorithm , the following proofs show how he could have demonstrated that any integer root of an integer is an irrational or an integer , and even that the cube root of an integer either is not the root of a quadratic ( i.e. , not in the form $ ( a + b \ sqrt{N} ) / c$ or is an integer .
that 's a shame , because on average a man is a lot more likely to be killed or injured in an assault than a woman is Part of male privilege is having the privilege to deny it exists , because it 's so normal to you .
that 's a shame , because on average a man is a lot more likely to be killed or injured in an assault than a woman is Every time this topic of domestic violence comes up , I ca n't help but think about the constant stream of news stories about men killing their wives / girlfriends and sometimes their children as well .
In the real world , being forced to fight and possibly die in a war is a very bad thing ; being able to feel confident you wo n't be subjected to this is a very good thing .
The number of nodes in a diagram is the number of dimensions in a kind of space , which I call a reflection space , and Coxeter calls a kaleidoscope , but which most mathematicians call " the dual space of a Cartan sub-algebra of a Lie algebra .
In membrane theory a string is a 1 - d membrane ; an ordinary membrane is a 2 - brane ; and there are n-dimensional membranes going all the way up to 9 - branes in 10 - d spacetime .
( Lawrence , 1986 ) I try to set before my clients the idea that the meaning we give to our existence in business is articulated through thinking and thought or , to put it more colourfully , the greatest assets of a company are those between the ears of the people in the institution .
At best , a CEO is the role holder who acts in the ego function to the organisation .
World-views are ideological , and an ideology is a world-view .
Well over 100 grounds are featured , and the inclusion of a ticket stub image or a programme is a nice touch .
I think I tried to come back too fast after I had the baby and it 's just , having a baby is a lot of work and a lot of fun but I was n't enjoying my acting because I was so stressed out being a new mom and we just redid our house at the same time so everything has been kind of hectic .
God has a heaven and an earth of his own making , and temples of man 's making ; but he overlooks them , that he may look with favour to him who is poor in spirit and serious , self-abasing and self-denying ; whose heart truly sorrows for sin : such a heart is a living temple for God .
In addition , a bankruptcy may have a greater negative impact on a borrower 's FICO score than a foreclosure , according to the myFICO Web site : " While a foreclosure is a single account that you default on , declaring bankruptcy has the opportunity to affect multiple accounts and therefore has potential to have a ...
One intriguing technique used to obviate the consequences of such a dream was a practice of telling the dream to a lump of clay that is then dissolved in water .
A yod is a particular aspect configuration involving at least 3 planets ( or an angle : MC / IC , or Ascendant / Descendant ) .
If a yod were a cod , we 'd all go fishing ; but it 's more shark than a lark , despite all our wishing .
Poetry is a manner of singing while a memoir is a canvassing of detail that brings many persons and much of an environment into focus .
Also , building a company is an extremely time-consuming process .
And thenceforward he denied all such requests , saying : A man possesses of learning only so much as comes out of him in action , and a monk is a good preacher only so far as his deeds proclaim him such , for every tree is known by its fruits .
Four rides a week is a reasonable starting goal .
) A child is a flower His head is just floating in the breeze .
He had many friends but also many enemys and keeping Solon a secret was the way to stop mad people like Hope and Callisto from knowing about her son , who would have been a target .
U.G. once said , " Having a bath is a sensual activity .
A slaveholder who did not realize that a slave was a person with rights that he was violating may perhaps be morally innocent , but he is still in possession of property produced by labor stolen from its true owner .
The word " sequent " used as a noun is a suggestion of Kleene 's in his Introduction to Metamathematics ( 1952 , p 441 ) , taken up in many languages in the form of purely invented words .
The standard terminology today is " cut elimination theorem " All of the logical rules of SC have the subformula property in a very immediate sense : each formula in a premiss is a formula or subformula in the conclusion .
If it is a negation ¬ A , replace the conclusion by A. If at any stage of this " reduction process " the conclusion of a sequent is a compound formula , you have to consider any conjunct or any instance of universal quantification as a possible conclusion .
A verb is the the most basic atom of action in Storytronics .
A compound is a substance with two or more elements , combined in a specific ratio .
If an individual is a dependent student and his or her parents are living together as a couple , but are not married , whose information must the individual report on the FAFSA ?
A forecast is a forecast .
Safecracker : A word is the code of the safe .
Participation in in-class as well as out-of-class discussions , take-home quiz sets , hands-on exercises with real data , and a presentation are the criteria for the final grade .
A spasm is a very severe tightening , which can obstruct the blood flow through the artery .
And he could not clear himself of this charge before paying a fee of five thousand pounds ( a pound is a little more than four pieces of gold ) .
A cookie is a small element of data that a web site can send to your browser , which may then be stored on your system .
You can lead a horse to water , but you ca n't make him drink As a student , owning a car is very important because a car is a necessity that you cannot do without Scanned documents may be placed in the current or permanent file .
The presence and retention of moisture within a thatch is the key to straw breakdown .
A node is the section of the stem where the leaf is attached .
I was getting more and more tired the longer I was on dialysis so , for me , it does feel like a transplant is the best option .
A school is a huge and intense human organisation within which millions of interpersonal transactions take place daily .
Taking back power as a woman is a painful business , and a dangerous one : in the end , it may mean dispensing with men altogether .
Certain ' prescribed circumstances ' are ignored in determining whether a person is a promoter .
No return of a later proposal or arrangement is required where a person is a promoter in relation to two or more notifiable proposals or sets of notifiable arrangements that are substantially the same ( whether they relate to the same parties or to different parties 6 ) if returns have already been made of the other proposals or arrangements .
The tests to determine whether or not a person is a promoter are not restricted to situations where the actions that result in the person concerned being a promoter are undertaken as part of the supply of a taxation service or are undertaken for remuneration .
For the purposes of this section a relative is a brother , sister , ancestor or lineal descendant .
An example is the setting of a thermostat .
But the commitment to buying a home is a great one the payment schedule can run as long as forty years , the interest charges will exceed the cost of the house itself and the payments need to be made each and every month .
The question of whether a company is a member of a group for purposes of the section will be determined in accordance with the main amendments .
Paragraph 36 applies the new group definition to the rules for the application of taper relief in paragraph 11 of Schedule A 1 TCGA and for any determination of whether a company is a member of a group after 1 April 2000 .
Paragraphs 37 and 38 ensure that from 1 April 2000 the new definition of group applies to determinations of whether a company is a member of or a principal company of a group for the purposes of paragraph 5 of Schedule 2 TCGA and paragraphs 8 and 9 of Schedule 3 TCGA .
The problem is that a charity is a Tax on the poor , and in the previous example we are actually describing a welfare state run by the government .
The idea of aiming for a button with my heel in traffic or halfway up a hill is a bit worrying 3 .
If a solicitor is the executor of the will , does the next of kin have any rights to see what is in the will or to be informed of what happens to the deceased 's effects and assets .
Once a grant of probate has been made , a will is a public document .
On a table was a new-looking Indian book on teaching oneself meditation .
A pessary is a stiff ring that is inserted by a doctor or nurse into the where it presses against the wall of the and the nearby urethra .
A Trophy is a trophy no matter where you manage , Winning the spl & winning the premiership would be the same imo .
We must keep in mind that a student is an individual and that every student is a unique one , and it needs to be taken into account while developing materials as well as developing any session .
The development of that gaming and sporting instinct which became a passion is another feature .
Considering all this we are our own worst enemy by refusing to accept that our greatest asset as a nation is the fundamental thinking of our people , not our institutions , so-called advanced centres of corporate R & D or our universities .
Professor Patchett : An example is the draft Mental Health Bill .
How big an issue is this generally ?
LORD RICHARD : Once a month is a session of the Committee ?
It 's alright to be ' I 'm alright Jack ' , pull up the ladder , ' No such thing as society , ' do n't ride on a bus-you 're a failure if you do .
' The rank is but the guinea 's stamp , the man 's the gowd for a ' that ' wrote Robert Burns in ' A Man 's a Man for a ' that ' - a poem which is recognised internationally a celebration of basic human equality .
On top of the quest for the considerable funds needed for such a project was the controversy surrounding the closure of the town 's swimming pool .
A mine was the centre of a whole community and everyone was affected by its progress .
In the good times , everyone enjoyed a share of the wealth but the closure of a mine was a catastrophe that could mean the destruction of the community .
Sharing music together as a family was a far more profitable use of time .
The prisoner 's lawyer , Kathleen McHugh , failed to get him cleared on the grounds that a cell was a private place and what man was doing was perfectly normal .
As to the wife -- oh how like a night-mare is the thought of being bound for life to one of my cousins !
Branding someone a witch is a crime , but Detective Blacky Koglame estimates that fewer than 1 per cent of cases end up in court .
The period of a siteswap is the number of beats , & for Vanilla siteswaps is simply the number of digits in the string .
The period of a siteswap is the number of beats , & for Vanilla siteswaps this is equal to the number of digits in the string .
A project is an extended task which usually integrates language skills work through a number of activities .
You control the action , a movie is a set path of events glamorised beyond reality .
One of the things I have seen being a problem is the disconnect in tone between the two acts , so we tried to really look for the darker nature in Act I , which is there , but frequently gets glossed over as funny anecdotes .
I think the idea Labour needs to grasp is that writing a blog is a form of public communications - the media ( and many others ) read it and they 'll turn it around into a story if its newsworthy .
Through a complex set of measurements West and a group of scientists have been able to show that unlike biology , the bigger a company is the more likely it is to fail , whereas the opposite is true for cities and complex systems in nature , regardless of the fact that they are all economies of scale .
A dingbat is a kind of picture .
a language is an integral part of a culture but English is a special case because more outsiders speak English than the english themselves .
An investor is a supporter who invests money into the project and will receive equity in return .
template isDigest(T) Use this to check if a type is a digest .
Issuing a passport or visa to a terrorist is a real risk , and Embassy Sanaa works hard to make sure that their product is free of fraud .
An example is the new WTC building 7 , which was fully completed in 2006 .
Put shortly , a hook is a function you can create as part of a dll or your application to monitor the ' goings on ' inside the windows operating system .
A token is a word or a phrase or a token delimiter that is not a space character .
" An individual is an " accredited investor " if the individual has a net worth , or joint net worth with that individual 's spouse , of $ 1,000,000 , excluding primary residence , or if the individual has a net income of $ 200,000 , or $ 300,000 with the individual 's spouse , for each of the last two years .
I have played around with Kolibri and was very impressed , but the lack of a browser is the big thing .
An alternative method of reading data from a file is the very cool function , which reads the entire file into an array ( remember them ? ) with one line of code .
The one constant in our lives with the true focus of Christ is knowing beyond the shadow of a doubt is the fact that accepting Christ as our Lord and Savior we will see His face in heaven !
A contract is an agreement and you should know what kind of agreement you enter .
If we were to learn that the chief benefactor of a hospital was a mafia don , should we therefore close the hospital ?
President Bush has been advised that a moratorium is the most lucrative option .
In ancient Rome , a pileus was a felt cap given to slaves upon receiving their freedom .
Just as a postscript : Shane is hitting towards the point I 'm getting at : even debating with someone who thinks repeating points constitutes an argument is a waste of time .
Colvin argues that , " if we presume that too much familiarity with a problem is a disadvantage , then we would expect to find that Watson and Crick came at this one unburdened by the excessive data that clouded the thinking of the other researchers .
She is also claiming that vampires have a natural life-cycle , like the life-cycle of the butterfly , in which a girl is the caterpillar who is transformed into the butterfly-vampire .
It is easy to get the hair out of a screen however , removing it from a pipe is a different story .
Suffering ill health due to an accident is a common occurrence , if the accident was not your fault contact a compensation claims solicitor to find out if you can make a claim for compensation .
How can a pain be the same thing as a physical-chemical condition of the body ?
If a startup is a shitty work environment ... guess what ...
I used to tell people working for a startup was the best experience they will ever have .
" his mother replies , " A zombie is a small yellow flower .
A player being a Top five picks .
Simply put , a switch-hitter is a batter whose lead hand is determined by the handedness of the pitcher .
It is important for bloggers to write SEO friendly post because SEO of a blog is the main key at which they can get success .
Forming relationships and building a community is a tried and true method for driving traffic to your website .
In trying to make a decision I often do n't get a hunch when a decision is a good decision but I surely get that hunch when I know that my decision is not right .
A quale is an entirely physical thing that also happens to be the basis of human experience .
Like every year , this year also a theme has been decided for the International women 's day 2013 , which is " A promise is a promise : Time for action to end violence against women , " for United Nations , while International Women 's Day 2013 has declared the year 's theme as The Gender Agenda : Gaining Momentum .
So being a virgin is a strong possibility .
Surely Ramayan , if a belief is a belief of eastern people - Indian People .
A Separation is a portrait of a fractured relationship and an examination of theocracy , domestic rule and the politics of sex and class - and it reveals a terrible , pervasive sadness that seems to well up through the asphalt and the brickwork .
In support of the presence of such an arrangement is the clinical observation that focal lesions within lateral PFC do not result in modality-specific deficits but only diminish the region 's function in a general manner .
" A presumption is an assumption of fact resulting from a rule of law that requires the fact to be assumed from another proven fact or group of facts .
Stated differently , a presumption is a declaration of public policy that if a litigant presents evidence of a specified set of facts , then an additional fact will be presumed to exist .
" A presumption is a doctrine of substantive law , not evidence .
The distinction between a presumption and an inference is perhaps best understood by noting that " a presumption is a deduction that the law requires the trier of fact to make if it finds a certain set of facts .
Rather , a presumption is a rule of law enabling the party in whose favor it operates to take his case to the trier of fact without presenting evidence of the fact presumed .
The only thing that makes the device a quarter-detector rather than a slug-detector or a quarter-or-slug-detector is the shared intention of the device 's designers , builders , owners , users .
Chemical Compound : A compound is a molecule made up of two or more different elements that are linked through chemical bonds .
The Eleva tor.jav a model is a variant of the siphon simulation model .
A conversion is a marketing term that describes the final outcome of a website visit .
For an e-commerce website a conversion is a sale from the online store .
While the articulation of Fantasy as a genre is a comparatively modern development , fantastical elements have always been common in imaginative writing .
Yet when you think that death of a member is a time of great trauma for a family , and what a help it must be to know that the service is to be just what the person would have .
A Hotpod is an individual , high spec , executive workspace .
Here is the Wikipedia-definition of sock-puppeting : A sockpuppet is an online identity used for purposes of deception within an online community .
In its earliest usage , a sockpuppet was a false identity through which a member of an Internet community speaks with or about himself or herself , pretending to be a different person , [ 1 ] like a ventriloquist manipulating a hand puppet .
Trolls Essentially , a troll is a person who posts with the intent to insult and provoke others , Wood explains .
For many , such a visit is the highlight of a trip to Egypt , while for the country , it is a very welcome source of revenue .
Besides , fraud is fraud and a fiddle is a fiddle , whatever the amount claimed .
This court has held that striking such a balance is a matter of discretion for the judge dealing with the application , and that this court will not intervene unless there has been an error of principle : R v. Vale of Glamorgan Borough Council , ex parte James [ 1997 ] Env .
Someone who submits a quote is a good start !
Description : A white smooth-skinned body and dark blotched tentacles emerging from a crevice are the characteristic features of this sea cucumber .
A CAS is a unique reference number which confirms the acceptance of you studying at LSBF .
Metal A metal is a substance whose atoms are so close together that their outer shells overlap .
A trend is a trend whether caused by legitimate or nefarious market participants .
( The ISBN of the first named UK publisher will become the record control number in field 001 . ) * If an item is a part of a set or multi-volume work where each part has been catalogued separately .
Mashuq Ally , from the Centre for Islamic Studies , Lampeter , described how the climate of multi-faith co-operation had declined since the 70 s when many teachers had recognised that the presence of a plurality of religious traditions in a school was an enriching experience .
' A manger was the cradle That Christ was rocked in : The provender the asses left So sweetly he slept on .
( Exercise : If your own party is included , what is the lowest practical size for your party which maximises the likelihood of a hill being a Riemann ? ) Or how about a " TAC " : a hill at the top of which no one is wearing an orange cagoule or carrying walking poles ?
An example is the solar panel industry which claims that Chinese manufacturers have benefited from government subsidies which helps them keep their costs low .
Believe that the idea of a re-test is all about raising cash , it is not necessary .
A bridge is a device used to segment a large network into two smaller , more efficient networks .
" The cost of running a car is a significant factor , she adds .
There does n't seem to be any official definition of a ' pod ' , but here 's our take on it : A pod is a grouping of food trucks assembled at an established location ( usually a parking lot ) on a semi-permanent or regular basis .
A bunch of Saracens chasing deer through the Aquitaine is hardly a casus belli - all this talk of an invasion is an affront to the Peace of God .
He then tries to alleviate his increasing sense of isolation by transferring some of his shame : " a monster is a creation , so we can call man a monster too .
For one , barring some physical expenditures , a byte is a byte is a byte .
A movie is a large amount of data .
The first screen in the select and succeed strategy will help you determine if a job is an employment opportunity you want .
I always thought Rahm Emmanuel was overrated as an SOB-swearing a lot is no substitute for a well-cultivated ruthlessness-and while Anthony Weiner was a fine SOB in his own right , he had his own liabilities ( besides the obvious ones ) within his own caucus , and , in any case , could n't do it all by himself .
LaBruzzo and his fellow travelers seem to believe , quite sincerely , that a fetus is a moral person and that killing it is wrong .
A metaphor is a figure of speech where two items are compared to reveal a deeper meaning .
Additionally , defining community and who should be invited to or involved with a memorial is a tricky question and can be fraught with politics and questions of identity .
Cyhexatin was a widely used miticide that was voluntarily removed from the market several years ago due to the belief that it was a potent teratogen ( a teratogen is a compound that causes birth defects ) .
( Whether that encyclopedia should be contained in a computer is an open question .
A proverb from Ghana declares that : A woman is a flower in a garden ; her husband is the fence around it ' .
Three proverbs from the Lugbara of Uganda illustrate this weakness : " The tongue of co-wives is bitter " , " The tongue of co-wives is pointed " ( which means that the co-wives can sting each other with their talking ) , and " A co-wife is the owner of jealousy " ( 29 ) .
These sites have safety among users because they do you , then you start to forgive him too much info however , because leaving a second is a crude reference for taller men because of the sting out of " putting your ex nervous about losing your breakup .
Friedman did more research of sleep medicine in general instead of thinking that a drug is the answer to everything , he would realize that many people are cured of their depression and no longer need meds once their insomnia is correctly diagnosed .
hortulanus - ( Latin ) gardener ; a hortus is a garden and the hortulanus is the person who works in the garden .
A CARD is a re-print of a business card not larger than 5 inches by 7 inches in size which provides basic contact data .
A columnist is a journalist who writes pieces that appear regularly in newspapers or magazines .
It has many ac­tively star-forming re ­ gions , with by far the most ac­tive be­ing one that 's 1,000 light-years wide ( a light-year is the dis­tance light trav­els in a year ) .
An exception was the Camera ' sTuesday report on complaints from relatives of Churchill 's late first wife that Churchill had misrepresented some aspects of her biography , and that the biography had been formally denounced by Canada 's Assembly of First Nations .
" Being married to a writer is a hard life .
Up to now , the only candidate for a link is the meteor 65 million years ago that some believe helped exterminate the dinosaurs .
confector - ( Latin ) tanner or dyer , a confector was the person who prepared animal skins for use .
A recipe is a set of instructions for making a single dish .
Arranging A wedding is both frustrating and exciting at the same time , but when you 've to operate within the limitations of the budget that process since immeasurably harder .
All you 'll see when you do a search is the relevant results this site hosts .
Such a disappointment are these stiff-necked Jooz ...
In almost any situation , the mere perception that an individual is a state agent can put them in serious physical danger .
The existence of a society is a matter of successive generations , so that the question of the rightness or wrongness of any considered choices of cultural values , is a matter of knowing to what result the practice of such values would lead , several generations later .
That he and his friends have recently managed to close down a Cathedral is a point he fails to explore .
Also , not a coincidence is the news that the US and UK may lose their AAA ratings .
... a species is a group of organisms that reproduce with one another and that are not capable of reproduction with the members of other such groups .
An example is the pleasure one gets from the beauty of a fine suit of clothing .
A mini-cheddar is a shorter walk than the original all-day walks .
Selling a house is a progress of steps .
His only offhand suggestion of a mechanism is the possibility of the drastic changes attributed to ' homeobox ' additions or duplications whereby " modern " body architecture and size was " achieved .
Mediation efforts between the two parties broke down last year , so it seems like a lawsuit is all but inevitable .
The usual request submitted by a form is a POST .
and since all you have as an argument is a hope for next time ... i 'm done with my response .
The reason I do not provide any of my own research work to Gray is because I expect him , as he considers himself to be such an expert researcher , to do his own , and proper research to find out the facts , not just make assumptions that a person is a Civil War veteran , without any proper documentation .
The lateral surface area of a prism is the sum of the areas of its lateral faces .
The total surface area of a prism is the sum of the areas of its lateral faces and its two bases .
Thanks Carol - yes running with a partner is a good way of warding of potential problems - whether they 're people of otherwise .
d ) You have the added benefit of being able to see the blood as it 's being given ( somehow that adds to my experience ) , and a pint is a lot more than I 've ever been able to get with a knife !
The closest Jerusalem gets to an exception is the parliament building Knesset , an example of modern architecture in the early days of the state of Israel 's history .
What makes this an oddball is the format : Only the top series ' PC class runs at Kansas in two 45 - minute races .
An unregistered user joining a group is the most complex thing I can think of a user doing in GroupServer .
A philosopher is a person whose laboratory is his mind .
Furthermore , while managed care may be bureaucratic and it may often make short-sighted and poor policy decisions , it is nevertheless clear that we do not have unlimited resources for health care , and both hospitalization and psychoanalysis four or five times a week are both extremely expensive .
An initiative is a proposal of a new law or constitutional amendment that is placed on the ballot by petition , that is , by collecting signatures of a certain number of citizens .
A pixel is an unscalable dot on a computer screen , whereas an em is a square of its font size .
But even more worrisome in a way is the fact that viciously dangerous non-state actors such as al Qaeda , Al Nusrah and Hezbollah are active factors on the Syrian battlefield .
A defect is a thing you did that you should n't have done .
A goal is a dream with a deadline !
Is it not reasonable to suppose that the grooves through which Jackson is compelled to produce the notion of a horse are the same species of grooves , acquired through the habits and customs of late nineteenth-century English life , that compelled him to characterise aphasia as a feminine malady ?
Our system needs to be changed and acknowledging this problem in this blunt and clear a way is a great first step !
The final score : 7 peaks in three days for me , 6 peaks for Mike ( ok , maybe Emigrant Peak barely shows up on maps , but a peak is a peak ! ) .
Too many young people believe that a gun is the answer to their problems .
A hashtable is a completely different kind of beast from a sequence , so it makes no sense to treat it in the same way as a sequence .
On the other hand the more general case of passing several blocks to a function is a little more complicated .
An ibrik is a small metal cup on the end of a fairly long handle , and is a Turkish tool for making coffee .
A deputy is an assistant with the power to act when his superior is absent .
A pardon is the forgiveness of a crime and the penalty associated with it .
A quota is a prescribed number .
A treaty is a binding agreement under international law concluded by subjects of international law , namely states and international organizations .
Harvey Betan , a business continuity planning consultant , said that the A ( H 1 N 1 ) pandemic raised awareness of the need to plan for a pandemic : " Suddenly , organizations realized that a pandemic was a serious possibility .
Jurgis could be very obstinate when he wanted to , and he was in this case , much to the dismay of the women , who felt that a man-doctor was an impropriety , and that the matter really belonged to them .
And how very cunning a trick was that !
( top ) A Ziptip is a bed of chromatography media ( C 18 or C 4 ) fixed at the end of a pipet tip .
The signal strength of a peak is a reflection of how well an analyte has ionized .
Such a query is the only way to stop use of high-quality counterfeits like those being produced by Chinese organized crime .
Within Ireland , these regions correspond to Irish counties , while elsewhere in the world the area covered by a region is a bit bigger .
An extension is a function that is being called to give the chance to modify the message just before it is being sent ( an outgoing extension ) or just after it is being received ( an incoming extension ) .
Drawing a border is the job of the HTML or CSS .
One hundred percent chance that a woman gets raped , traumatized , decides to carry a gun , but is afraid to see counseling because she does n't want her gun taken away , because she now knows a gun is the only thing that stands between you and a successful rape .
The truth is we all want to be in gangs , if a gang is a group of people who think like you do and do like you do .
A wingtip is a wingtip , and mine have been repaired three times .
An artist is an independent unit and a self-energizing force .
LAURA : Yeah , I think setting a bedtime is a good idea basically for anyone , even if you 're not someone who struggles with sleep .
probably the best time for writing a blog is the time when you are in the middle of a crisis .
Let 's define the term right now , saying that a blend is a language that contains elements , including vocabulary and grammar , either borrowed or inherited from other languages .
And as many of you know , that increase in the context of the first balanced budget in a generation is a significant victory .
A blend is a creative mental simulation guided by a specific purpose at hand - say , entertaining her readers and at the same time fostering popular support for Charles II - that draws on at least two distinct conceptual spaces shared by writer and readers .
So on the topic of architecture and aggregates , an aggregate is a term which is used heavily by practitioners of domain driven design ( DDD ) and is defined as " A cluster of associated objects that are treated as a unit for the purpose of data changes .
Having terminology to describe a phenomenon is a Good Thing .
The fundamental " quantity of motion " of an object is the product of its mass and velocity .
A vector is a quantity that has both magnitude and direction .
An example is The light setup , installed at Malmö Konsthall in 2005 .
Speaking personally , I had thought that a belief was a viewpoint that lacked supporting evidence .
Porter - A porter is a dark ale ranging from dark brown to black in color .
Voluntary work in a museum is a possibility for you .
A talisman or a touchstone is a person , animal or object which your main character perceives as a representation of an ideal .
Find A PhD is a guide to current postgraduate research and PhD studentships .
The official jobless figures are getting worse , but just having a job is no longer protection against poverty .
A Centycore was a true composite , with horse 's hooves , lion 's legs , elephantine ears , a bear 's muzzle and an antler with ten points , unicorn like on its forehead .
A pentagram is a five-pointed star - " pente " is Greek for five , and " gram " means to write .
So if this pathetic excuse for a waitress is an example of her parents I doubt they would be much more enlightening to deal with .
Four monks in an ambulance is the kind of arresting picture that would be hard to conjure from nothing .
Such an attitude is a handy theory for Rebello to close his book with , and depends on how much you regard the films made after Psycho e.g. The Birds , Marnie , etc. ) .
A poem is a working unit .
" In Mr Cooper 's second application he states in his form that the room which is wholly or mainly used by the person with a disability is a hallway and it is used as a hall .
The LPS clarified that a hall is a room .
While we can obviously not at this stage predict whether the tests will prove appropriate , I think we have demonstrated that such an approach is both feasible and sufficiently attractive to outside bodies to induce them to commit considerable assistance to the project .
Such a society was the Essenian Fraternity-a mystical association of speculative philosophers among the Jews , whose organization very closely resembled that of the Freemasons , and who are even supposed by some to have derived their tenets and their discipline from the builders of the Temple .
" A hansa was a gild ( hence " Hanseatic League " ) and if the crafts in York had a building of their own , it means that they were strong and well organized , the Masons among them .
AVENUE Forming an avenue is a ceremony sometimes practiced in the lower degrees , but more generally in the higher ones , on certain occasions of paying honors to superior officers .
Barry Cunliffe ended ' The Ancient Celts ' ( qv ) with the thought that : " Perhaps the only real definition of a Celt , now as in the past , is that a Celt is a person who believes him or herself to be a Celt " .
A ship was the favourite type for a state among the Romans , and Horace uses it in his ode ' Ad Rempublican .
His appearance in the Lodge of Edinburgh at a meeting held at Holyrood in June , 1600 , affords a very early authentic instance of a person being a member of the Masonic Fraternity who was not an architect or builder by profession .
If there are suspicions that a child is a victim of sexual exploitation , but there is no immediate or direct evidence , the police officer noting the concern should refer to the local Police Child Abuse Investigation Team ( CAIT ) by completing a ' coming to notice ' ( CTN ) form on the Merlin system .
With an enormous cast and a running time of over three hours , The Birth of a Nation was the most ambitious and most expensive movie to date .
I know a number of people who 'd say " I 'd hit him " but I 'm sure in private honesty with themselves would recognise that dealing with such power and aggression combined with a blade is the type of fight we 'd all do well to avoid .
My sensei always reminds everyone that a knife is a " rage weapon " every time we train weapons defense , stating that if someone attacks you with a knife it is because they want to stab you and slash you over and over again until you are dead or they are n't pissed off anymore .
" A cow is a very small sacrifice , " she 'd said .
An iPhone is a prime example .
Thus , on page 116 , in a poem are the lines : " So Masonry and Death are both the same , Tho ' of a different name " ; meaning that a man knows nothing of either until be bas been initiated .
What kind of a world is this now , when even gods are losing hope ?
So signal a defeat was this publicly expressed national estimate of the party , that in the year 1833 it quietly withdrew from public notice , and now is happily no longer in existence .
For the new scientists of the 17th century , the priorities were reversed : the important question about a home was the mechanical process by which it was constructed , without reference to questions of higher purpose e.g. , what might constitute the best life for the people living in it ) .
I do n't want to suggest that what I have said above about Dawkins 's handling of his concept of a meme is the last word on the book .
[ 4 ] Suffice it to say , a myth is a story that has complex layers of meaning .
A file is a collection of information that has been given a name and is stored in secondary memory .
The form of the information in a file is the same as with any digital information --- it consists of bits , usually grouped into eight bit bytes .
If a jail be the cause of tribulation , thou seekest to get forth from jail : if fever be the cause of tribulation , thou seekest health : if hunger be the cause of tribulation , thou seekest fulness : if losses be the cause of tribulation , thou seekest gain : if expatriation be the cause of tribulation , thou seekest the home of thy flesh .
For nations in a manner are the evil spirits of Gentile errors .
A gastroenterologist is a doctor who has spent an extra two or three years studying the gastrointestinal tract .
lainey - I thought 200 a day was a lot ?
But when women write a historical set in a war , they are just as likely to write of the marriages , the food and the day-to-day stress that came when a woman was a camp follower and therefore part of the army .
The digitization of research outputs of an institution is a step in the right direction for the building of institutional repositories of such organization .
That 's where I hope my list is useful , because one of the most important things to consider in whether an author is a buried treasure is consistency .
" To me , the best example of a wimpette is the heroine in a historical who does n't smack the alpha-jerk hero on the head or give him a scathing set-down for abusing her abominably .
But thou , when thou hearest , " Render unto Cæsar the things which are Cæsar 's , " know that He is speaking only of those things , which are no detriment to godliness ; since if it be any such thing as this , such a thing is no longer Cæsar 's tribute , but the devil 's .
A hind is a female red deer .
Now , a boar is a huge , wild pig with a bad temper , and tusks growing out of its mouth .
A press-kit is an item that is generally complementary .
Real muslim which cryes when he reads Qur ' an cant be a gay .
A cestus is an ancient battle glove .
The first version of a cestus was a series of leather thongs that were tied over the hand .
A gimmick is a wrestler 's , or a group of wrestlers ' , story or theme that can be summed up in a sentence .
A Website is an extension of the educational institution .
A highlight is the English Market , established in 1788 by the ruling Protestant corporation ( although the building was restored after a fire in 1980 ) .
But ceding direct editorial control over the content of a book is a far different animal , and we went to a variety of sources to check it out .
A residential assessment can be useful in deciding whether a parent is capable of retaining the care of the child but a major disadvantage of such an assessment is the cost .
Removing a child is a very serious step ; it should only be done if the parents cannot look after the child , and if the standard of care the child would receive in local authority care would be better , and would actively contribute to safeguarding the child 's welfare .
Such a concept is both erroneous and dangerous .
Wargaming as a hobby is a fairly idiosyncratic one with folk pretty free to do what they like compared with some other pastimes .
A Visiting Professor at Brighton University , he explains that a brand is a promise , not a logo ; it 's about the authentic soul of your organisation and your community .
A transfer is an undertaking or part of an undertaking which is transferred from one employer to another .
' There was the time Hoffman first pulled a flair , ' he continues ( a flair being a backflip with an 180 degree twist ) before adding rather incongrously , ' it was in Mansfield in 1990 .
Only in television can an executive be a hero on the unemployment line .
I take your point about evangelical reading , as i guess i am most familiar with that , my brain is always on the " application " path for all the theologising and philosophying even from anothers perspective as a critic is a waste if it serves no purpose in application , even if the purpose is to make us aware of things we dont like in historical theology or belief ..
The acceptance of a gig is an honourable bond surpassed only by the rituals of certain cultures involving the exchange of bodily fluids ( blood , in particular ) .
" ( Mental Health Act , s 94 ( 2 ) ) While there is no requirement that an individual be a current or former psychiatric patient , a " mental disorder " is necessary , defined as " mental illness , arrested or incomplete development of mind , psychopathic disorder and any other disorder or disability of mind " .
Increasingly public knowledge that an individual is a vulnerable person , and particularly a vulnerable person with money , may well increase the chances that the unscrupulous in society will endeavour to take advantage .
Thus a consumer must be a " natural person " " acting for purposes which are outside his trade , business or profession " ( Article 2.2 ) while a supplier is any natural or legal person " acting in his commercial or professional capacity " ( Article 2.3 ) ( 2 ) .
Later rounds focus on whether a candidate is a good fit for the position , based on intellectual capacity , commitment to the firm and industry , logic and analytical abilities , as well as writing skills and ethical decision making .
Arms are named according to what 's on the end of them , so an arm with a cup at the end of it becomes a cup arm and one with a touchpiece is a touchpiece arm .
The strength of a team is the diversity of knowledge , skills and abilities that different individuals bring .
A highlight is the reading of Hitchcock 's Vertigo ( 1958 ) that points to spatial slippage in the distinctions between the audience , actors and the framing of the scene in the discussion of diegetic and non-diegetic movement through space .
A website is a living thing that needs TLC - Tender Loving Care - for it to grow .
When an eel is a juvenile , it may fall prey to an octopus , but once it reaches a good size , the tables are turned and the moray becomes the invertebrate 's most deadly foe .
Being able to present your research to an audience is a key skill for researchers to develop .
Over the bars and into a tree was the best way I can explain what little I actually saw ( and what we could piece together later ) before he came to rest , inert , in the undergrowth .
The one good thing about it being on a hill is the views over the town .
Nothing in Re B , in our judgment , requires the court to identify an individual as the perpetrator of non-accidental injuries to a child , simply because the standard of proof for such an identification is the balance of probabilities .
I still venture to think , however , that it will be rare for a judge to find himself in the position in which Judge O ' Dwyer found himself , viz. unable to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that a person was the perpetrator yet able to conclude that , of those within the resultant pool , he or she was the more likely , or most likely , perpetrator .
The definition of Authentic Instruments contained in the Regulation requires that such an instrument is an Authentic Instrument , the authenticity of which relates to the signing and content of the Instrument and that such authenticity is established by an authority empowered for that purpose in the member state in which it originates .
The earnings arising from the use of credit-tokens eliminates any argument over whether the payment by an employer of credit card bills run up by an employee is a discharge of the employee 's pecuniary liability ( see EIM 00580 ) .
The beneficiaries , however , will normally decline this right to withdraw and will selecting a trustee is another important consideration when setting up this type of trust .
For each of us individually , a car is an easy option .
Improving the resilience of a network is an issue of risk management , which includes risk identification , evaluation , and acceptance or mitigation .
Reason in real estate thehome wealtheffect why buying a home is a good idea why fsbos fail - the real story if only you had bought a home back then .
A mitochondrion is a structure within the cells of the body which is supposed to generate the energy necessary to the functioning of the body .
She went on , " The employment judge has , in my view , paid no more than lip service to the principle that strike-out is a draconian measure and the hurdle to be overcome by an employer is a high one .
A podcast is a series of related audio or video files , placed online with a public URL and linked to via an RSS feed , accessed by free download subscription over the internet using digital media players .
A millimole is a measurement that defines the concentration of glucose in your blood .
A dog is a dog is a dog , to them .
When I awoke in the morningt to find out that she had died , my heart broke for those two boys who without a doubt were the light of her life .
The only thing that really maters on a blade is the square edge of the rubber , the metal spine will last for years .
A humorist is a person who writes or performs humorous material .
An intersection is a road junction where two or more roads either meet or cross at grade ( they are at the same level ) .
A manipulator is a vampire sucking other people 's blood .
A chicken is a cockerel or pullet if it is less than one year of age .
Those Duffy pics are brill , taking a moment is a really lovely one though !!!
Popping to a dealer is an expedition for me !
Half of a payment is the full payment itself , and the other half is the Item Number of the auction .
You say that he has these episodes and attacks anything that is near to him at the time , but what happens if a person is the nearest thing ?
The only dog I have ever come across that was unpredictable and attacked seemingly without a trigger was a DDB that used to attack his owner ( but never the son ) .
I do n't use it , but a friend is a regular and recommends it .
I 'm not against it at all I 'm against the elitist term ' professional people ' anyone who works for a living is a professional person even a carpenter .
The choice of a school is a private , domestic matter , so what right has anyone to ask for reasons ?
An ecosystem is a community of interdependent species , all of which are necessary for the health and proper functioning of the whole .
What kind of an environment is this for families to grow up in ?
Briefly stated , A theory is a hypothesis with proof behind it .
A priori is a term that identifies knowledge that is gained independently of , or " prior to , " sensory experience .
Ren Man , if ya think 1 cm a year is a tiny distance for the separation along the Mid-Atlantic rift , how long a period of time would be significant ?
[ / QUOTE ] Sorry I really have to disagree with this statement , a horse is a fight or flight animal and as they do n't rationalise they must be retrained to become rational when confronted with danger .
A horse that refuses to walk into a bog is a wise horse .
The difference between this show and Once Upon a Dream was the energy and committment of the cast .
Such an exemption was no doubt welcomed by such men as Prince Charles , who has had many of his letters to ministers exposed under the Act , revealing his attempts - and successes - at influencing policy .
But to argue that a monarchy is the thing that has provides stability for any country is not just wrong but also phenomenally insulting to its people .
From what we can gather support for a republic is the majority view now in Australia , New Zealand and Canada most people in the Commonwealth would prefer that Charles ( who has now a terrible record as a potential head of state ) does n't become head of the commonwealth and instead the position is rotated amongst member countries .
A second was a foreign woman who may have seen someone acting suspiciously near the apartment on Thursday night .
How can a country be a democracy without an elected head of state , with the head of state never standing for election , with only the Csar coming from one family ?
It was Yorkshire Major , conducted by Nicholas W. H. Simon and concealed in a bag was a chilled bottle of champagne with which to celebrate .
Framley Parsonage is in the main a very good specimen of social photography , and though here and there a figure is a little askew , and the light and shade are occasionally somewhat unnatural , the characters are well drawn and fairly grouped .
( A muon is a negatively charged elementary particle about 200 times heavier than an electron , and ultimately decays into an electron and a neutrino .
A carbonardo is a rare type of diamond ( with a very hard polycrystalline structure ) .
A bolometer is an instrument that measures the total amount of radiant energy ( not just visible light ) received from a star or other celestial object .
A galaxy is a large group of stars - our Solar System is a tiny fraction of the galaxy we call the Milky Way .
His duties as a missionary were all faithfully discharged , and he saw this portion of the West grow up under his own eye and teaching .
" The ability to grow a vegetable is a survival skill akin to swimming , " says Versenyi , as she steers her blue van toward the big-box store with the A-to-Z seed rack .
In Judaism an angel is a spiritual entity in the service of God .
The subject of a sentence is the person , place , thing , or idea that is doing or being something .
The majority leader of the House of Representatives argues against cutting-edge research into the use of human stem cells by saying that " an embryo is a person ...
James Hall : " A dream is a piece of reality ... whose meaning is pregnant but uncertain , and whose fate in the world of the waking-ego lies in our own hands .
The main entry point for an analysis is the class alliances in Ukraine that internalize the economic domination that both the SCO-aligned Russian bourgeoisie and the EU-aligned German bourgeoisie ( backed by other Euroamerican powers ) and reproduce it .
A monogram is a symbol made by combining and overlapping two or more letters ; it can be straightforward and functional or a lot more ornamental in appearance .
This clearly shows that a man and a woman are the total opposite in mind and body .
" A dictionary is a book containing all the words in the language .
Such a democracy is a compromise and is accepted , not because the majority can be always trusted to be morally superior , but because it may be less susceptible to abuse than other forms of government .
The editors of our text [ Plato , Five Dialogues , Euthyphro , Apology , Crito , Meno , Phaedo ] also mention that a drachma was the standard daily wage of a laborer in late fifth century Athens .
The old saying , " Another day , another dollar , " reflects circumstances when a dollar a day was a good wage -- actually a very good wage ; the King 's Shilling ( 1 shilling = 24 ¢ ) is the daily wage one might have gotten in the 18th century in the British Army .
That is getting us back to the point where a shilling ( 24 ¢ ) a day was a typical wage .
Doctors often can recognize a basal cell carcinoma simply by looking at it , but a biopsy is the standard procedure for confirming the diagnosis ( see see Diagnosis of Skin Disorders ) .
Drunken and rude passengers aboard a plane are a nightmare .
Your reminder about treating it as a business is a sound piece of advice .
A foal is a horse not yet one year old ; a colt is a young male and a filly is a young female .
A gelding is a sterilized male horse .
A pony is a small horse , less than 58 inches ( 146 cm ) tall at the shoulder .
Though she showed early promise , the idea of actually becoming an artist was another thing altogether .
A fiber is a lightweight concurrency model .
From reading what I see here everyone who owns and wants to continue to own a gun(s) is a nut ?
And to the fellow who said owning a gun is a privilege not a right ought to check out his history again .
Such a future is no long-shot .
Taking the problems of Detroit ( the most downtrodden metro area in the US today ) and applying that lens to the nation as a whole is a mistake .
A pointcut is a program element that picks out join points and exposes data from the execution context of those join points .
We will then add a new ' record ' model which indicates that a record is an instantiation of a description set in a particular encoding syntax .
In geological terms , a kettle is a depression formed when an isolated block of glacial ice melts .
The position of the words in a sentence is the principal means of showing their relationship .
" I think the most difficult thing about becoming a surfman is the time it takes to qualify , " said Scott .
A surfman is a leader while underway and moored , an expert trainer and should always be confident but never arrogant .
Now raising a family of his own with his wife Melinda , Augusta admits finding the balance between family life and the challenges of becoming a surfman was no easy task .
The kitchen sink approach to programming an application is an unstable approach , and usually a symptom of bad or no design .
However , even diving into a pool is an experience that is both physically and mentally stimulating .
" Destroy the Search One of the easiest ways to spot a fake is a misspelled brand name .
( B ) " matter " : the matter of an object is the place .
Another absolutist argument : Not only do rigid motions in space determine if an object is a congruent counterpart or incongruent counterpart , but also whether the space is orientable ( all rigid motions preserve incongruent counterparts ) or nonorientable ( some rigid motions do not preserve incongruent counterparts ) plays a role .
Hence , our synthetic a priori claim , " a line is the shortest distance between two points " , is revealed to us as true by means of the spatial " form of intuition " .
Moreover , since the " forms of intuition " are applied to all possible experiences , we thus know that synthetic statements such as , " a line is the shortest distance between two points " will be true a priori ( i.e. , true of all possible experience ) .
In many of these theories , such claims as , " a line is the shortest distance between two points " , no longer hold true ( since the shortest distance could be a curve , etc. ) - and , in addition , it is possible that a posteriori experience of the world might be able to determine if space is either Euclidean or non-Euclidean .
Yeah , if you look on our website it 's spelled out , but it 's really simple : a winnovator is a woman who is taking innovative steps to create change in her community .
A buycott is a consumer tool that helps you organize your spending to support causes you care for , and to oppose those that you do n't .
A blister is a fluid-filled separation of the epidermis from the dermis or a separation within the epidermis itself .
R. Levi ruled : [ The birth of ] a child is a cause of cleanness 9 in those days only in which a woman may normally become a major zabah .10 What is the reason ?
As long as you continue to push things are n't going to happen exactly the way you want them too but sometimes a failure is a re-direction .
Trust me babe , you 'll be soaking up the sun for days - a little at a time is the way to go , so you get a healthy , be achy glow without burning and harming your precious skin ( think of the wrinkles you can avoid ) .
Not to strain at fruit flies , a mule is the sterile offspring of a male jackass and a mare .
You can come out ahead under some circumstances , but powering a refrigerator and a fan is an unlikely one .
" Giving a quote is the opportunity for you to sell yourself so it should be professional , clear and as detailed as possible .
The security of a cabinet with a padlock is a minefield of considerations .
A safe is a good way to ensure that your paper documents are secure - however , it 's important to choose a safe that can protect your documents effectively .
If you follow all of these common sense guidelines , then a safe is a good option for storing cash securely .
Whatever you choose , a safe is a fundamental piece of equipment for any home worker who is serious about safety .
The masquerade was , in effect , a fancy-dress ball where the wearing of a disguise was an absolute requirement .
You and I may agree that there is the world of difference between murder and masturbation , but orthodox Christian teaching - Protestant as well as Catholic - as has been pointed out on this site before , says that a sin is a sin .
Karl Marx identified the problem with this a hundred years ago - the companies which want to sell the working class trainers at £ 50 a pop are the same companies who want to pay them 10 p an hour .
An alternative is the nasopharyngeal airway - this is a little rubber tube that you basically stick up the nostril .
A troll is a dead person who lives in the ground and comes out to terrorise a district at night .
Why a lawn is the death of decking ?
An illustration is the adjacent land owner in Scotland that is having extreme pressure put on him to allow a power cable to be installed across his land , because the operator would otherwise require to install a considerably longer cable along the main highway .
According to your own sources , what they would do if they were part of a coalition was a secret , so no broken promise there either .
His work revolves around the " Dividend Discount Model " which , simply put , states that the value of a company is the discounted sum of future dividends .
An individual is a 3 - centered being , whose parts work together towards the attractor of Real I , or the first line of work .
Likewise , if they can see that a path is a muddy track and they include it in one of their guides without properly detailing the state of the surface then they ca n't really complain when the cyclists who they have guided into the morass blame them !
" Being a millwright is a dying trade .
Two runs especially worth a mention are the ladies from the Clapham Mixed team , Justina Heslop & Moana Burt who beat everyone , including the men on stages 13 & 14 .
Without giving away the ins and outs of the story , we are treated in the final moments to the spectacle of a young lady in a pear tree making love to a young man , assuring her old blind husband below - who 's sight has just been magically restored to him - that having sex with a young man in a tree is the best way of returning his eyesight .
The conceit was that the show was a triumphal homecoming for a charismatic leader , intellectually you could deal with irony of a couple of hundred ' party faithful ' rattling around in a huge hall whilst on stage all is bombast and stadium rock posturing , but in reality a gig is a gig and a half empty gig is n't a great gig .
WOMADelaide - my first experience of a big music festival , going as an artist is the way to do it .
To have completed this game within a year is a real testament to the Valve team as there are many changes to the game 's core and aesthetics .
One of us must bow to the other , that 's true , and since a man is the more reasonable of the two , it 's up to you to show the patience .
A bishop colleague of mine has said that he was told by his spiritual director , that the only things to be concerned with as a priest were the glory of God , the pain of the world and the renewal ( by which he meant repentance / change of heart ) of the Church .
We do not eat foxes , hunting as a game is an outdated minority cultural form , and is highly uncivilised ( despite the neat clothes , the posh accents , the percieved ' polite society ' ) .
:D comon an alarm on a pitbike is a bit too much .
comon an alarm on a pitbike is a bit too much .
They are referred to as wynds and closes : a wynd being an alley that is open at both ends , and a close one that is only open at one end .
Very friendly easy going landlord & staff , spacious pitches , toilets / shower very clean & a hairdryer was a nice touch .
Dave Muller 's coloured pencil drawing , A beginning is the first in a series documenting the artist 's record collection aligned in neat a-to-z order , an irresistible invitation to guess identity on the strength of one man 's album collection .
We all know that a constitution is the set of laws that a set of people have made and agreed upon for the government that enumerates and limits the powers and functions of a political body .
A legend is a legend .
Ansel Adams said twelve a year was a good crop ...
Oh yes a charicature is a much better idea !!
Over the years , especially when I used analog for my business , I found one of the most used devices in a darkroom is a garbage can .
Staying in a castle was a dream come true .
Tell me : if a soul is some sort of immaterial substance ( ignoring the blatant oxymoron for a moment ) that " leaves " the body at death , how is it that our material senses can make information evident to this " soul " ?
The trust instrument could include a statement as follows : " If a grantor is a current income recipient , then a grantor shall retain the right to direct the trustee to distribute an undivided percentage of trust assets to qualified exempt charities on the last day of any trust taxable year .
So , even if a galaxy is the size of a subatomic particle relative to us , it still outputs the same amount of energy as it would if it were at our scale .
Av­er­a­ge­ness may sig­nal that a face is a pro ­ to ­ type-a stan­d­ard or typ­i­cal ex­am­ple of some ­ thing , ac­cord­ing to the sci ­ en ­ t ­ ists , Pi­otr Win­kiel­man of the Uni­ver­si­ty of Ca ­ l ­ i ­ for ­ nia , San Di ­ e ­ go , and col ­ leagues .
Still , selecting a list of 15 dancers to represent a century is a provocative task .
Definition : A hostel is a place where people gather to read their copies of Lonely Planet .
In any case , let me quote another definition , whose source I cannot remember : " A tourist is a traveler who does n't look like he 's traveled very much .
Being a toyon was a position of honor , importance and prestige , but no special treatment resulted .
Being an artist is a life that I choose because I am passionate about creation .
The Catholic Encyclopedia says that a chapel is a " place of worship with a separate altar in a cathedral , a large church , an institution ( school , convent , prison , rectory , hospital , etc. ) .
And so , how this might look in a timeline is this , you make little request of the list of friends and you get the results , and you thumbnail one , thumbnail two and thumbnail three .
The Congressman noted that the big roadblock to such a reform is the U.S. Senate , which protects the interests of land grant colleges in the smallest states .
I believe that the brain can learn to associate certain types of noise with productivity and other types of noise with distraction-you can reach a point where the buzz of a cafe of the industrial hum of an office is a trigger for the type of thinking you need .
I ask you , what criteria do you use to determine if a stranger is a " normal " citizen or a " bad " person .
Being a cop is the perfect job for the mentally defective and emotionally retarded .
A fireplace is a must for my next house .
Ar-Rashid passed them on ; Ibn Sab ' in accepted the commission with a smile-this is the Muslim account-and triumphantly and contemptuously expounded the difficulties of the Christian monarch and student .
Beyond the by-now-staid teleclass / seminar , what other large-scale high-touch snippet of a person , if a person is the product in part , can we give people who are interested in what we provide ?
In the museum 's words , Margaret Lee 's " Eggplant ( phone ) is a hybrid object that is neither an eggplant nor a phone-it is a meticulously crafted , hand-painted , and plaster-casted sculpture .
Calling him a terrorist was an easy way out , a way to avoid giving condolences or apologizing for the crime police committed , acting on his orders .
A tlayuda is a ( large ) pizza size dish which a thin crispy base which is covered with refried beans , chorizo , lettuce and string cheese and then topped with avocado , a slab of al pastor , a slab of cecina ( dried beef ) , radishes and a jalapeno .
A hash is a convenient mechanism for storing this mapping .
Use a parameter to map to the Perl callback A hash is an ideal mechanism to store the mapping between C and Perl .
Also a computer is the only way to get music , video and other media onto the phone .
The only other club with a visitor is the Frog and Peach where Arnaud Surfinmaise is to be found .
Seeing a naturopath is an investment in your best asset , your health , you have nothing if you do n't have that I promise you .
How common are these fibres - how certain a match are the two sets of fibres ?
The book as a whole is an invaluable and fascinating source on costumes , dance figures , music and other detail .
Use non-default DBU / UU settings with care esspecially when such a database is a source or target of any conversion to / from external formats .
A surprise is the location of the flightline - the eastern end of the runway !
I thought that the voracious page after page consumption of a novel was a pleasure that you reluctantly said goodbye to when life got serious and camomile tea became the nightcap of choice .
Bat roosts are protected even when bats are not present and if a roost is destroyed it is not necessary to gain a conviction that it be proved that the person involved had knowledge that such a place was a bat roost .
Also a disappointment was the appearance of a plain grey German MiG -29 instead of the colourful 29 + 20 , but the latter is on major service until the end of July ( so will possibly miss Fairford as well ) .
Exceptionally , when only two composers have contributed to a print and are named on the titlepage , the Online Catalogue lists them both ; an example is the Tallis / Byrd Cantiones sacrae ( 1575 ) .
The photos of an able-bodied child in a wheelchair are a source of embarassment , but he accepted full responsibility for the publication of the document .
To quote from Mr Rowney : " If parents decide that a school is a good school , they will get them [ their children ] there no matter what " .
If parents decide that a school is a good school they will get them there no matter what .
He said that the best part of being an astronaut was the fact that it was so challenging : " You are working very hard at being successful and being part of a team .
At the time of the original investigation Gary Mycock had been arrested with his brother and examined for tattoos - no such tattoo had been mentioned at that time , even though a tattoo was a key clue in the case .
A month is a long time to wait even in the holiday season .
Soon after a good spell of passing between Paul Roberts , Tim Brandreth and Jones opened up a great chance for Thomas but he tried to pass when a shot was the better option .
An efficient solution for such a scenario is the generation of fragment spaces which encode huge numbers of virtual compounds by their fragments / reagents and rules of how to combine them .
Comparing that motion to the flow of a river , he propounded the theory that " a glacier is an imperfect fluid or a viscous body , which is urged down slopes of a certain inclination by the mutual pressure of its parts .
The [ 419 ] working of a clock is a model of uniform action ; good time-keeping means uniformity of action .
This is because the definition of a curie is a real-world phenomenon happening in time : the number of nuclear disintegrations happening in one gram of Radium at a given second , or , thirty seven billion decays per second ( 3.7 × 1010 decays per second . ) Obviously , the curie is equal to thirty seven billion becquerels .
By way of demonstration , remember that a gray is a joule of energy absorbed by a kilogram of matter-your body produces 100 joules of heat energy every second .
It seemed that being a criminal was a legitimate profession .
The important aspects of these transformations are that a signature be an unforgeable and irrefutable certification of the agreement to which it is attached .
How can we claim to believe , as the long-used slogan of the United Negro College Fund goes , that " a mind is a terrible thing to waste , " when our children are shackled to schools that are often little more than a government-run babysitting service ?
King Kelono Sewandono wearing a mask and a crown is a stylish dancer , Bujanganom also wearing a mask is an acrobatic dancer .
A servowriter is an expensive piece of machinery , costing up to $ 50,000 or more and often must be custom-made for a particular make or model of drive .
I was only ten years old , but for me , injecting your head with the venom of a snake , or painting the portrait of a man wearing a mask was a perfectly natural part of the imaginative world , and the imaginative world was by far the most interesting .
What 's really a joke is the thin , see-through veil of libertarianism used to cloak these decisions favoring the plutocrats .
A community is a group of individuals who have a common interest , purpose , objective , or desire ; who work together to reach this future point .
" A goat is a dumb creature , hard-headed , homely , " we 'd say .
" Some men who have a macho attitude still think that if a woman 's an artist she 's also a whore - or a mother confessor , " Kathy says .
The cost of a license was the equivalent of $ 34 million-a hefty fee for a startup-and the South African Reserve Bank was wary of issuing new permits .
Similarly , understanding the needs of the customers and working with them to provide a solution is the key to success .
A kiss is a lovely trick ... designed by nature ... 2 stop speech ... when words b-come superfluous .
A kiss is a special thing ... that u can cant take wit-hout giving , & u cant give wit-hout taking .
A theremin is a musical instrument you do not touch .
Also , moving a file is a NameNode operation so , if the reader is currently reading the log , it wo n't generate any exception .
A pidgin is a new language which develops in situations where speakers of different languages need to communicate but do n't share a common language .
Like a pidgin , a creole is a distinct language which has taken most of its vocabulary from another language , the lexifier , but has its own unique grammatical rules .
The basic idea of a scheduler is this : you have a pool of threads waiting to be run .
" Citing a paper by Hayes , who had done an analysis of sixteen atrazine studies , they wrote that " the single best predictor of whether or not the herbicide atrazine had a significant effect in a study was the funding source .
A mineral is a naturally occurring inorganic substance with a definite crystal structure and chemical composition and predictable physical properties , including hardness , refractive index and color .
A pigment is a finely divided insoluble substance used for its colorant properties in an artistic medium or manufactured product .
But from the point of view of categorification a stack is a an inconsequent generalization of a sheaf , it seems .
A hackathon is a weekend sprint development event where developers , technologists , entrepreneurs and other innovators work together to address specific challenges .
Background A patent is a property right granted by the Government of the United States of America to an inventor " to exclude others from making , using , offering for sale , or selling the invention throughout the United States or importing the ...
Background A trademark is a brand name or logo that identifies one seller as the source of particular goods and services .
Normally a gimp is a single thicker thread which is used to surround a pattern to high-light it .
For example whether a printer is a color printer and the available paper sizes ( Letter , A 4 , ... ) .
If a relationship is an emotional connection between two people , then it requires two people to make it a fully functioning and emotional entity , if only one person is giving input , is there a relationship , or is there just a need for connection ?
} , title = { { Protein classification using ontology classification } } , journal = { Bioinformatics } , year = { 2006 } , volume = { 22 } , pages = { e 530 -538 } , number = { 14 } , abstract = { Motivation : The classification of proteins expressed by an organism is an important step in understanding the molecular biology of that organism .
A washroom is a place that can be termed as a cross among a powder area and a toilet .
The venture of remodeling a home is an investment of both time and money ; hence , there is a great need to make sure that remodeling plans are carried out properly .
What finished them as a power was the layer of ash over the eastern side of the island .
Sometimes , a moment is all you need .
And it would n't matter whether the kid was on our side or the other side - a kid is a kid is a kid , right ?
He went on to say that development of a unit was the responsibility of local management and SRSAG , that the RCS would only become involved with making recommendations outside those related to training issues if invited to do so .
The distinction between a gift and a bribe is a fine one .
An image is a refection or an impression that may be a little too polished and perfect .
The publics of an organisation are those groups of people with whom it needs to communicate .
A day is the time the earth takes to spin once on its axis .
I always thought that a jaffa was an orange .
He sits quietly for a moment and then says , " A yawn is an honest opinion openly expressed .
A trigger is a type of cause .
The nature and degree of suffering experienced by an individual are another matter .
A spandrel is the by product of another function ; it > was n't deliberate .
If the " name " of an apple were a picture of an apple , that would not be arbitrary because it resembled the apple .
However , it is still worked for small decorative objects - a favourite is the miniature lighthouse .
A deposit is a one-off payment which shows that a parent intends to take up a place .
But a review is those things , too , you might say .
This Act applies to discrimination on the basis of whether or not an applicant is a trade union member .
As part of the information in a cookie is the name of the site which caused the cookie to be created .
Any " charity " that acts as a lobby are a parasite on society and certainly do not deserve a tax break for giving advice to politicians .
Any suggestion that you could dissuade people heading for that one platform from entering a station is a bit pie-in-the-sky IMO - if the station is open they will come .
Any > suggestion that you could dissuade people heading for that one platform > from entering a station is a bit pie-in-the-sky IMO - if the station is > open they will come .
Any > > suggestion that you could dissuade people heading for that one platform > > from entering a station is a bit pie-in-the-sky IMO - if the station is > > open they will come .
Dr Carter adds : ' You ca n't always use a toothbrush but chewing sugar free gum after a meal is a suitable alternative , stimulating the production of saliva which helps to neutralize plaque acids that may lead to tooth decay .
> The experience of many people ( including myself ) suggests that a letter is a far preferable way of solving any Oyster problems than calling the helpdesk .
Exponents often claim that works of fiction are really cryptic allegories or that writing a novel is a strategy for dealing with ' forbidden ' subjects in a respectable way .
A chemisette was a lace bib type garment that was worn beneath an open neck blouse or dress .
' Getting enough working capital to reinvest in a business is a huge problem , ' he says .
A shed is a place to obtain the moderate exercise of bending , stretching etc , and not being very athletic I mean that most sincerely .
A shed is a place to escape the worries of life ( if you have any ) , to get away from that boring job that has to be done in the garden , and a place to escape from the wind rain and snow .
I have commented telling them not to confuse reimbursement with a wage , not that £ 2.50 an hour is a wage .
Clearly , a birth-reading is a pretty serious matter .
Dual diagnosis as a term is a simplistic description of a complex concept .
A bridge is a third party company that connects our location to one or multiple external locations .
Running alongside the V & A partnership is the NEVAC Consortium .
An object is any segment of the stream of material that makes self-contained and satisfying sense .
A source told US Magazine that a dispute is the desire of the night .
But what we 're left with is this woman who has never had the opportunity to exact revenge on anyone , and she acknowledges candidly , " A house is a dangerous place : kitchen knifes , deadly hammers , sleeping pills , gas stoves . .
A week is a long time in economics !
Harold Wilson said that a week is a long time in politics .
Such an apology is a precondition to correcting the second omission - the agenda that Ed Miliband labels responsible capitalism .
It is necessary to observe that the proportion of Huzvbish words in a manuscript is no criterion of its age , but merely an indication of the style of its writer , for it is not unusual for a manuscript of yesterday to contain more Huzvarish than one of the same text written five hundred years ago ; though sometimes the case is reversed .
The fact is the police will use a caution to lighten their load and ensure an admission of guilt , but the after effects of a caution are every bit as damaging as a criminal record .
A caution is a full and frank admission of guilt regarding a recognised offence , and there should be enough evidence such that the balance of probabilities would be that a jury would convict you in court .
An interview is a two-way process which gives you the opportunity to ' sell ' yourself to an employer ; and for the employer to ' sell ' their company to you .
I think you must remember that a writer is a simple-minded person to begin with and go on that basis .
" A grandmother is a lady who has no children of her own .
A grandfather is a man grandmother .
A photograph is a harder , tougher version of the truth .
Such an event was a one-off incident in his life , a dangerously ego-reinforcing occasion .
I was just thinking on those same lines , especially on the fact that a drug is a drug , and whether this became an epidemic or how , is no longer the issue , and never was .
How much value these journals add to a product is an important question .
In statistics a run is a sequence of data that can be characterized by possessing a particular property .
The 14thA M declares that each citizen of a state is a citizen of the UNITED states , and cannot have their US rights taken away by state prerogative .
The combustion of the gas in a balloon is an illustration of a chemical reaction , in this case hydrogen in the balloon reacting with oxygen in the surrounding air to form water with the release of 232 kJ / mole of water formed .
For example , many refer to manual data processing and emailing in MVP phase , but what if timeliness ( real-time ) of a solution is a core feature of the product ?
An inbox is a personal space .
A home is a financial asset and more : it 's a place to live and raise children ; it 's a plan for the future ; it 's an investment in your community .
Generally speaking , a mortgage is a loan obtained to purchase real estate .
Starting a business is a process and the more flexible you are the more likely you are to see problems coming before they do damage .
Everything that is n't a crisis is a pitch for money , or sometimes it 's both .
Sharing information that 's going to make its way back to an enemy is a bad idea all around .
With giant sink holes opening up spewing radioactive particles , losing a rod is the cost of doing business and public injury is collateral damage .
No attendance , no weapon 5 ) Mental health programs have been poor in the country , and one would assume that a massacre was the sign of lunacy , Mental health issues in a family need to be taken into consideration when granting permits / registration .
But this is not in vacuo ; it is a conclusion based on the praxeological knowledge that since a good is any object of action , more must be preferred to less while it remains a good .
SURS is given the authority to determine whether or not a person is an employee and is eligible to participate in SURS .
The SURS Board of Trustees is given the authority to determine whether a person is an employee .
In case of doubt as to whether an individual is an " employee , " the decision of the Board of Trustees is final .
A flop is a movie that does n't turn a profit .
A colon is a way to introduce things and to join ideas , and says something definite : this part of the sentence is important , and you can say it in an authoritative voice .
A butty is a sandwich ; the chips within are the traditional British staple which Americans mysteriously call French fries .
The conclusion I have drawn from my application of that information This truth 5 is to be contrasted to lying A lie being a deliberate dishonest statement ( or omission ) of any information , belief or conclusion I have with the intent to deceive .
If you build a new bridge , you generate much more traffic than you would if you built the same length of road somewhere else and if you make a bridge more attractive by taking away tolls , you will generate more traffic than you would if you had done something similar elsewhere , because a bridge is a key part of any infrastructure network .
( A compiler is a program that converts the human-readable program we have written into the executable program that will run on our computer .
Of course , we still are often confused by whether a term is a condition or warranty .
Michael Barry , the vice principal of St Matthew , says the decision to become an academy was the only answer for local Catholic families .
A simple example of what might constitute a licence is a landlord renting out a room in his / her house to a lodger .
Doing the Pushing Hands practice with a partner is the best method of training the Five Strategies and Thirteen Tactics mentioned earlier .
First , A play is a work performed by actors , in words and movements , which says simply that it is a work performed .
To continue the definition , A play is a work performed by actors , in words and movements , containing the story in action of a problem confronting a protagonist .
A smartphone is a great little device to have if you 're on the move and do n't want to carry anything with you ; they 're small , lightweight and can do the job of accessing mobile internet services with ease .
One of my local community councils provided an option-it was the option that was taken-but their views may not have been considered in this case .
Another highlight of my day was the ride , yes it could have been aimed at the younger person but a ride is a ride .
Hosting a fundraiser is a great way to give something back to the community , to network with community members and raise awareness about pressing local issues .
It 's said that the pleasure in riding a motorcycle is the getting there , not the destination .
A goal is the cause of all human action .
" A child is a curly dimpled lunatic .
Application Suggestions : Applying BetterYou™ Magnesium Oil after a shower is an addictive pleasure that is both stimulating and beneficial .
" The recognition that our future queen has paid us a visit is a massive thing for us .
" Albion W. Small , wrote : " A sociologist is a man who is studying the facts of society in a certain way .
I read somewhere that travelling in a car is a bit like watching a movie on a screen .
The 2007 Eurobarometer survey claims that for 38 % of young Europeans the most important difficulties in finding a job are the lack of opportunities in their countries .
Also , meeting a therapist is a good thing , but unfortunately usually reserved for those who can pay ( good ) therapist .
A cookie is a piece of information generated by Web servers and stored on a users PC .
A tub is a small wagon , runs on rails and carries about half a ton of coal .
He thinks what you get from your sense experience of a table is a set of different sense experiences , corresponding roughly to the different modalities of sense .
Whilst it is important to look carefully at the individual reasons given by the Recorder for his uncertainty about the psychologist 's evidence , it would be misguided to permit this detailed analysis to prevent a recognition that the assessment of a witness is a sophisticated process involving many factors which interact with each other .
A cookie is a software application that enables a site to customise its services to the interests of the user .
The basis of such a programme is the dissemination and accessibility of economically sound and efficient technologies through out the oil industry .
However , strongly against such a statement is the Ajax Cape Town trio of Wilfred Mugeyi , Khama Billiart and Tafadzwa Rusike , whose team lies three points behind the Soweto giants , the Chiefs quartet of Thomas Sweswe , Tinashe Nengomasha , Zhaimu Jambo and Knowledge Musona , who are four points off their biggest rivals .
Finished to a high standard throughout a viewing is a must to appreciate the accommodation on offer .
Maybe it was n't too difficult for me because I had spoken in midweek meetings , and my father 's twin brother was a preacher , so that going to church , and then taking part in a service was a gradual matter .
It is no evidence that a person is a Christian that he hears a gospel preacher and is amazed at what he hears .
A cultivar is a breed of plant .
A breed is a finer distinction than a species , and it implies an intentional effort on the part of the grower to elicit certain traits .
For example : Rhododendron calostrotum ssp calostrotum var gigha is a shrub noticeably different from the even tinier Rhododendron calostrotum ssp keleticum A variant or a subspecies is a naturally-occurring plant , not a cultivar , though clones & cultivated strains are sometimes given names as though they were cultivars even if they 're not .
A cultivar is a plant selected for its horticultural or agricultural merit and is a plant that is given a fancy name instead of a botanical ranking .
Such a payment is the purchase of a magazine subscription and cannot be Gift Aided .
The consequences of such an arrangement are the same as in scenario at paragraph 3.51.14 above .
Where an asset is a chattel ( tangible moveable property ) worth less than £ 6,000 any gain is not chargeable to Capital Gains Tax .
" His argument in a nutshell is that NCH in this respect is really no different from any other university .
In my eyes a computer is a tool which I direct .
" ... a concept is an ' open-end ' classification , which includes the yet-to-be-discovered characteristics of a given group of existents .
The vast majority of Conservatives believe a ban is an infringement of civil liberties and damaging to the countryside .
Traveling in a caravan is a new experience in itself .
" For some people , buying a coffee is all about minimal fuss and so their needs are fairly functional taking into account things like reasonable quality and speed of delivery .
Something of an exception was a hospital that opened in 1908 which was initially known as The Lord Mayor Treloar Cripple 's Hospital .
Working with a coach is a highly personal experience , so finding the right coach-someone with whom you feel comfortable-is critical for success .
Also worth a mention is the fact that it carries the Energy Saving Trust 's " Energy Saving " logo , which means that it meets strict criteria on energy efficiency .
A database is a collection of data arranged into individual records for a specific purpose .
In the simplest terms , a blog is a regularly updated website , often with a personal voice .
As defined by Google , a vendetta is a feud in which opposite sides murder each other .
What to you is the all important truth of the Gospel which if believed means a person is a Christian ?
When He depart , an Emptiness Is the prevailing Freight .
The more unbalanced an economy is the more vulnerable it is to economic shocks .
If , however , an investor is a short-term share trader whose prime financial interest in the company is to sell their shares at a higher price than they bought them , their interest will be in short-term strategies to raise the share price , rather than long-term strategies to invest in organic growth .
a DVD is a digital stream , if the data is playing back at all , it 's playing back exactly as recorded .
Given an unlimited public guarantee for the liabilities of these institutions such a rule is a guaranteed , and proven , recipe for disaster , offering huge rewards to any innovation that increases both risks ( ultimately borne by the public ) and returns ( captured by the innovators ) .
A key is the issue that prices can be grossly inefficient in their implied risk-adjusted returns , without there being risk-free " money pump " opportunities ( pure textbook arbitrage ) .
A checklist is a handy tool to avoid forgetting things .
Thus the software requirements specification for a project is a set of tests !
An iteration is a high quality and usable subset of a project .
THE LIBERAL / PROGRESSIVE WING BEAT BACK THE DSCC AND TOP OFFICIALS : According to the Atlanta Journal Constitution , a ' Democrat familiar with Barrow 's thinking ' said Nunn 's refusal to step aside in a primary was a major factor in Barrow deciding to pass on a Senate bid .
A manuscript is the actual paper and ink of a book or a letter , which is written by hand .
A text is the words , the ideas , written upon manuscripts .
To us , a covenant is an agreement between two equals , like a marriage .
( An antiparticle is the exact opposite of the corresponding particle -- for example , a proton has charge + e , so an antiproton has charge - e . ) This is easily observed today , as gamma rays have enough energy to create measurable electron-antielectron pairs ( the antielectron is usually called a positron ) .
In physics , a wave is a method of energy transportation .
The amplitude of a wave is the height of the displacement .
Being able to visit 4 or 5 islands on an 8 day cruise is much cheaper than trying to fly to these ports and find hotels to stay in on each one of them , but if you want to spend more time at the ports a cruise is a great way to see which ports are your favorite .
In words , an expression is a variable , constant , or expression formed using one of the two string functions , concat or match .
A variable is a single letter like x , y , or z , and a constant is a sequence of symbols enclosed in double quotes .
" A week is a very short time , I think , in terms of the relative cost and the effort it takes to get that many people there .
Let us remind you that a ring is a region located between two concentric circles with radii r and R ( r < R ) .
Otherwise , a divorce is the same as living in adultury , which is forgivable but first requires repentance and a rejection of continuing the lifestyle of adultury .
Saul Bellow said , " A writer is a reader moved to emulation .
The May 3 -9 telephone survey , conducted by Celinda Lake and Jonathan Voss of the Democratic polling firm Lake Research Partners and by Neil Newhouse and Robert Blizzard of the GOP outfit Public Opinion Strategies , found that 75 percent of voters believe " that owning a home is the best long-term investment they can make and is worth the risk of ups and downs in the housing market .
This writer is of the opinion that if the New York bout was Hamed 's first test , he passed it , not with flying colors , mind you , but a win is a win , as they say .
If a system was an animal then the data base is the skeleton of the animal .
An example is the Java DataBase Connectivity package -- JDBC These days DBA 's and programers typically use the Structured Query Language -- SQL to define and access data in the data base .
In mathematics ( 1,2,3 ) is a 3 - tuple and ( 3,4,5,6 ) is a 4 - tuple and so a tuple is a list of data items .
Records are also called " Logical Data Groups " because a record is a collection of data elements that go together .
An example is the relation between an SSN and a resident in the united states .
Draw an ERD of : A formula is the sum of many terms .
A term is a product of factors .
Actually , this is perfectly logical : it does not make sense ( although it is everyday parlance ) to say that " a manuscript is a translation of another .
Seeing a movie in a theatre is a definite experience , separate from watching it on DVD , but it 's not worth the rudeness and aggravation .
But an airplane is a really interesting opportunity to have a longer conversation , when the consumer is looking for something to pass the time .
A vector is a section of DNA that can incorporate another DNA fragment without losing the capacity for self-replication , and a vector containing an additional DNA fragment is known as a hybrid vector .
Who is extreme is a grey area , who does n't want mohammad on a pic is the law that everyone lives with , not just extremists .
Any idea of a timetable is a joke .
Being a pacifist is an absolute term , being a Muslim is down to interpretation .
Once a decision is made it should be final , representing a country is the highest honour , not to be taken lightly .
Similarly , the council 's oil reser­ves are being depleted ; the recent warning from head of finance Graham Johnston that capital spending would have to be cut from around £ 20 million to at least £ 15 million a year is a symptom of this .
A TV is an excluded item .
A PhD is the typical route in , especially for research .
A car is a quality car if it fulfils the individuals ' requirements .
The one thing that will be a challenge is the people side of it , because we take on people who only have the right attitude .
One thing that always peaked my interest and imagination when I used to read the Famous Five as a child were the excellent descriptions of the food they used to eat .
and although the insulin is now easy peasy for me and just part of my everyday routine I would n't want to do it if a tablet was an alternative just yet .
Assigning monetary value to an intangible is the first step towards having its real value recognized .
And since a category is a unitary concept , eating half a banana leaves us with a sense of being unfinished , with a lack of closure .
" If a problem is a technical violation but does n't actually impede access , businesses should have the chance to fix it without the threat of a lawsuit .
" A logo is a graphic mark or emblem commonly used by commercial enterprises , organizations and even individuals to aid and promote instant public recognition .
Many Brits take a delight is the heat - even enjoying the pain of the heat .
She says a decision 's a month away , but she 's gone ahead and started a fund-raising committee just in case .
If a woman was an action hero , they would assume she ca n ' t / does n't fight as hard or use guns as much , so she would have inexplicable kung fu skills .
( A rush-light was a wisp of straw or other quick burning material used to light candles and lanterns . ) ( 3 ) He juxtaposed the glowing phrases of Rush 's lawyers with telling anecdotes of the doctor 's life .
" If a writer is any good , what he makes will have its source in a realm much larger than that which his conscious mind can encompass and will always be a greater surprise to him than it can ever be to his reader .
Indeed , a choice is an act of selection between two or more options .
An act of will or a choice is a binary event : one either acts or does not act in a certain fashion .
Hunger strikers-representatives of ours responded that if he came to tell us that the generous government can offer us a bed in a hospital in order to die on it , he should tell them that a struggle is a struggle , even when death looms .
And so wear a Wychsuit is a flexible bodysuit worn by Wyches that has been designed to protect one side of the Wych 's body ( usually the side they habitually turn towards their opponents ) whilst not impeding their movement or agility in any way .
He knew from a young age that being a brewer was all he ever wanted .
Also worth a visit are the BMW Museum , with exhibits showing the history of the famous brand , and the Deutsches Museum with its incredibly interactive natural science , engineering , aerospace and vehicles exhibits .
A cookie is a small text file that is placed on your computer by a website that you have visited .
It 's square : Forget rectangles , a square is the closest thing to a circle and , according to Sahhar , " It seems more natural " .
Running and marketing a business is an ongoing process .
In fact a business is the people .
In a puff-piece about the new found wonders of dumpster diving for food titled " Freeganism : Dumpster Diving to Buck the Spending Trend ABCNews is risking the health of the public by pushing an absurd notion that eating food retrieved from a dumpster is a legitimate ...
Trying to define the size and scope of an exhibition is a tough question to answer .
A rule is an action that Microsoft Outlook takes automatically on an arriving message , and you can set your own rules and choose the conditions and actions by using the Rules Wizard .
The ' worth ' of a manor was an estimate of the money its lord would receive annually from his peasants .
" Note : A rood is a quarter of an acre .
Erasmus thought More 's career as a lawyer was a waste of a fine mind , but it was precisely the human insights More derived from his life in the quotidian world that gave him a moral depth Erasmus lacked .
Personally I think a car is a good defence - it has a tough shell and goes pretty quick !
An actor is a guy who , if you ai n't talking about him , he ai n't listening .
A relationship between two objects in which one object is considered to be a more specific version of the other , generic object : " A camel is a mammal .
" I do n't think that reducing a wordy novel down to a play is any more daunting in terms of production than any other play .
( Most devices have an input and an output . ) The input impedance of a device is an indication of how much current is required to make the device function .
The output impedance of a device is a fiction that suggests how much current is available .
A snake is a bunch of cables bundled together in one casing .
An example is the function replace-string , which globally replaces one string with another .
Eager in order to explore , a pup is a leader in kisses and also winning friends .
At the same time , for C. Diddy , air guitar provides an opportunity to convey to his parents , who immigrated from Korea with the hopes that he 'd become a doctor or lawyer , that his chosen career as an actor-comedian is the best choice .
The horizontal divisions represent frequency , but they are spaced in such a way that an octave is the same width anywhere across the graph .
The Noise Reduction Coefficient of a material is the average absorption measured at 250 , 500 , 1000 , and 2000 hz .
For many people setting a goal with a date is a set up for discouragement if they do not reach the goal rather than information about time or process .
In my understanding , a milestone is a goal within a deadline .
" ( Pearl S. Buck ) Esoterica : Just being an artist is a big sack of abundance .
This self-awareness as an organization is the corporate knowledge that Popovich referred to in the San Antonio Express-News yesterday .
A wand is a witch or wizard 's most valuable possesion .
The inherent advantages of such a format are the search capabilities a computer provides and the ease of electronically transferring information from the encyclopedia to a personal document .
A warranty is a written guarantee to the purchaser of an article , promising to replace or repair the article , if necessary , within a specified period .
Buying a vehicle is a big decision .
Remember that a lease is a contract ; you will have to keep paying for the duration of the lease , even if you decide you no longer want or need the car .
Sometimes a person is the writer / director / creator / executive producer of a show , all at once , but they 're not technically the " showrunner " by name .
Introduced diseases can be dangerous to captive facilities , particularly in zoos where infection across different species in a collection is a serious threat .
I had an organic synthesis professor in undergrad who was obsessed with this-using a β-alkoxyalkyl lithium or β-alkoxyalkyl Grignard reagent in a synthesis was a recipe for red ink .
The fight for a cure is a daily battle , and it is real .
A eunuch is a castrated person made impotent .
A marshal was a man who tended horses , a combination of farrier and an early vet .
I used to enjoy Kirky 's war with the establishment ie Joe It was such a shock when I read of his death it seemed as if a light had gone out , hazel Yes Kirky was a funny one , always a laugh with him , maybe he 's calmed down a bit being a Grandad .
Definition of Wapentake : - Wapentakes and wards A wapentake is a term derived from the Old Norse , the rough equivalent of an Anglo-Saxon hundred .
another place that was all fields when i was a kid was the top of tansley street .
I found this really odd , because usually if a programme is a success , the BBC will milk it for all they can .
They had a fairly good range of food available and finding a table was a nightmare .
Both parents must work to earn a living and raising a family is a much harder adventure than it may be in Scandinavia .
A controller is the part of the application that directs and controls the model and the views by accepting input and deciding what to do with it .
But who 's to say that my interpretation of an article is any more accurate than yours ?
If an item is a parody , then it should be removed because it will detract from CP 's credibility .
A good example of such a device is the Lowrance HDS series .
For a Dex build , a shield is an absolute necessity .
Christina Patterson attacked the Jews in a column for The Independent : " I did n't realize that a purchase by a goy was a crime to be punished with monosyllabic terseness , or that bus seats were a potential source of contamination , or that road signs , and parking restrictions , were for people who had n't been chosen by God .
Genesis tells us again & again that God chooses Abraham and makes a covenant with Abraham & his heirs : a covenant being a two-sided agreement with obligations on both parties , like marriage ...
So more generally , the flux of a quantity across a surface is the amount of that quantity that passes through that surface .
Make no mistake , the end of a relationship is a loss and you 're new tryst threatens him with double the devastation .
Hiring a car is an expensive way to get around but essential if you want to see a lot in a limited time .
An abortion is a procedure where a woman chooses to end her pregnancy .
Especially because of their tendency to attempt to rig elections , etc. A lie is a lie , a cheat is a cheat , you can cover it up with marketing ... but it does n't change the character of the individual .
For the prohibition of a vow is a manner of consecration , v. p 105 , n 8 .
A lack of sex in a relationship is a biggie .
Knowing when to rely on prior knowledge and when to look something up or ask a question was a key skill I used when working on the desk at The Times .
The engineering necessary to construct a DysonSphere seems unreasonably difficult -- in fact , any change which would significantly affect the output of a star is a pretty awesome feat of engineering .
From this point of view a DysonSphere is a very bad thing to build , precisely because it visible over such a distance .
An aide is a special assistant .
flair / flare : A flair is a special talent .
A flare is a bright light .
A gantlet is a form of punishment in which people run between rows of people who attempt to beat them .
A gauntlet is a glove thrown down when a person is challenged to a duel .
principle / principal : A principle is a rule , standard , or general guide .
A principal is a chief or primary factor .
A preposition is a poor word to end a sentence with ( Day , 1988 , p 155 ) .
Earlier this month , the union said a picket was the victim of a hit-and-run at City Hall Square , while other irate motorists shouted obscenities and drove aggressively without regard for the safety of those on the picket line .
One of the founding premises of Conditions of Mediation as a preconference is that work on the phenomenology of media , technology and communication has been scattered .
A fanlisting is a place for all fans of a particular show , movie , actor / actress , singer , etc. to come together and build the biggest listing of people from all around the world who are fans of that subject .
Given the significant quantities of radioactive material currently outside regulatory control around the world , the unambiguous evidence of terrorist interest in using these materials to cause harm , and the ease of carrying out a radiological attack , we believe that such an attack is all but inevitable .
To me , the fact that this sort of thing is fed into a computer is a disastrous sign for the future of the film industry .
But I am very clumsy and very hard on appliances , always dropping this or tripping over that , and a laptop is a delicate instrument .
uriblank Another driver that looks interesting for someone wanting to stretch the high end a bit is the Intersil 55110 uriblank 1.5 nS rise time with 100 pF load , and at 1000 pF it is still about 10 nS 3.5 Amp output ( peak ) .
Finally realized that not having a degree is no reason not to pursue a road not taken .
Not everyone who has a camera is a photographer .
Not everyone who wields a paintbrush is an artist .
Attending a workshop is a learning experience , not a competition .
It does seem though that the more mentally disturbed an aritst is the more they are recognised .
Co-operative housing : A co-op is a legal association formed for the purpose of providing homes to its members on a continuing basis .
Reducing an image is a great tool to study a painting in progress as you have described .
A check is a written order on a bank for money drawn by one who has a deposit there .
The loss of a child is the worst thing that could ever happen .
As someone once observed ; the single most important piece of equipment in a darkroom is a waste paper basket !
An example is the Partnership for a New Generation of Vehicles initiative , in which seven federal agencies and twenty national laboratories have partnered with the Big Three automobile manufacturers in R & D projects aimed at improving auto safety , emissions , and fuel efficiency .
The eighth part of a dollar was a shilling in New York , 9 pence in New England and Virginia , and 11 pence in Pennsylvania .
what kind of a question is this ?
Another factor that can determine response to an agent is the iIndividual susceptibility of troops to that agent an agent also merits consideration .
The work of the Board must take into account that National Guard forces after a deployment are the responsibility of their respective state governments .
A clipper is a fast ship .
» Three a year is a lot .
Assigned to each roster as a guide is a member of the per­manent personnel of the post .
Apparently it was the tradition to hang out a red flag to indicate beer was on sale , and I did see a few red flags , but apparently the red plastic bag on a pole was a cheaper and more durable option .
One of the tasks of psychologists is to engage , assess and finally conclude whether an individual is a danger to himself or others .
A mediator is an independent person who tries to bring the parties together by informal negotiation .
Sustained increase in competitiveness of an economy is a hallmark of economic strength and stability of that economy .
" Purchasing a holiday is a more involved process , whereby knowledge of destinations , accommodation and amenities is crucial from a travel advisor .
A mollusc is a soft-bodied animal such as a slug , snail , limpet , mussel or octopus .
What kills a smoker is the constituents of the smoke that comes with the nicotine , so what these electronic cigarettes are doing is giving the smoker the nicotine but without most of those toxins - the only drawback is that we do n't exactly know what they are providing in all instances .
A highlight is the Springbank 1968 Sherry Cask whisky - one of only three remaining bottles in the world - while , at £ 17,000 a bottle , the Voyage de Delamain Grande Champagne Cognac remains for only extremely special occasions .
But there 's still a wonderful joy in the savage meanness of the game , like when the first thing that happens on a level is a huge boulder running you over and somehow cutting all your limbs off at once , or when the boss orc guy sends waves of minions at you before he can be bothered to unleash the Minotaur .
It is highly probable that such a scheme is a complete impossibility .
Some of you have brought into your congregation a spirit of individualism , as though a church is a gathering of individuals , like a sock full of marbles .
Or should it be up to a later date such as the date of trial , or even , in a case were an appellant thinks it right to exercise the discretion up to the date of the appealed decision ...
However , in the ordinary course , this factor can be expected to carry little weight , if any , in a case were the claimant 's needs cannot be met without resource to this property .
Engaging an audience is a vital consideration for any trainer or leader looking to effect change .
A coach is an inexpensive insurance policy .
If one of the measures of success for a country is the art it produces then the Foundry must surely be one of London 's nurseries .
So this Samuel Alexander says that our consciousness of an object is a mere perspective on something , but it 's a real portion of that object and not just a mental image .
Like a moment is an instant .
first of all i think that if our major criticism of a government is the way they use their expenses claims then they must be doing ok .
I do n't get why they have an MP as the speaker , surely to do his job properly the speaker needs to be neutral and not have a political opinion on anything , while an MP is the opposite , the jobs cannot both be done by the same person .
The chance to play an archaeologist was a big attraction , " he answered .
A Vision Without A Strategy Is A Prescription For Failure ..
A vision is some thing that is birthed in the mind and soul of the individual , some people act on it and others procrastinate for a period of time only to see someone else take their dream and bring it to fruition .
The second smaller tower of 1864 which is a chimney is a copy of a 12th century Lamberti tower in Verona .
Volunteering as a whole is a win , win situation it gets you away from the daily life routines and gives you something to look forward to , a pleasure that costs you nothing only time .
Asking for a deposit is a good test for the commitment of a customer ; it establishes that they can pay and that they are committed to the order .
For example , the active child of a list is the child that is drawn with a rectangle around it .
No matter where you are a bathroom is an essential - even in outer space .
The site seems to hinge on the idea that a construct is a lie and that is probably it 's greatest downfall - especially as it is an interesting topic .
A website is the best way to spend your marketing budget .
The lexmark 14 a cartridge is a standard cartridge , whereas the Lexmark 14 cartridge is a return program cartridge .
A great gift to give to those who enjoy a pint is the Festivity gift pack which comes in three flavours - Classic ( three bottles of Festivity and a Bath Ales etched glass - £ 10.99 ) , Quartet ( four bottles of the good stuff - £ 10.99 ) and Goblet ( two bottles and the eponymous etched goblet - £ 10.55 ) .
However , if a pothole is a hazard to road users then it must be inspected within a few hours of notification .
Bingo once upon a time was the game for the elderly and retired but no more .
Hampy is her cute little helper , although whether he is actually more of a hindrance is a debatable point !
An alternative is the Yellow duck tours which offer sightseeing tours to all the major sights in the city before splashing down into the water and taking a quick spin around the docks .
Sadly , Lockerley 's original church was demolished in 1891 after the new church was built , but well worth a visit is the very pretty saxon style church in nearby East Dean .
A receipt is a written acknowledgement that a specified article or sum of money has been received as an exchange : receipt of payment form .
A receipt is a document that is issued to signify the successful commercial of a Talking .
These things really matters for the player but the most important thing which matters for the player to a particular game at a website is the higher winning percentage of the casino , what amount of money they will get when they won the game etc. players do not care for any other thing except the money offered by the casino .
The business sector of a town is a great place and so are malls where there is already an established flow of regular traffic .
A coupon is a simple piece of paper , but a popular way for customers to exchange something in return for a product or service .
Securing the information that you 're collecting from a consumer is an obligation of the merchant .
In 1861 Christopher Spencer invented the best weapon of the war , the repeating breechloading carbine ( a carbine is a short , light rifle that does not carry a bayonet ) .
An omphalocele is a defect of the umbilical ring that allows evisceration of the abdominal contents into an external peritoneal sac .
delzell : Adjudicating a ticket is a one time fine paid as part of a punishment .
A fee is the price one pays as remuneration for services .
It looks like the gains to a blogger are a bigger audience and links .
To a leftist , a racist is a conservative .
A racist is a conservative who has just entered the room .
However , producing such an algorithm is a tedious and time-consuming process and will not be released with the 1940 data .
An antigen is any substance that elicits an immune response , from a virus to a sliver .
The upper intestine has about 104 bacteria per gram ; the large bowel has 1011 per gram , of which 95 -99 % are anaerobes ( An anaerobe is a microorganism that can live without oxygen , while an aerobe requires oxygen . ) or bacteroides .
A phagocyte is a cell that attracts ( by chemotaxis ) , adheres to , engulfs , and ingests foreign bodies .
Reading this post while watching a movie is the present and future .
One that always freaked me out as a kid was the Scary Stories to Tell in the Dark series by Alvin Schwartz .
Discovery might reveal more about Guardsmark 's corporate practices with respect to indefinite suspensions , including whether such a suspension is the equivalent of a discharge because no suspended employee is in fact ever recalled .
" It seems that one reason that your book has touched such a cord is the openness between the author and the reader .
A prefix is a String which starts with a digit , and ends with ' .
A crime is a crime no matter what anyone says .
Journalists , or those who employ journalists , who can establish credibility and relevancy with an audience are the ones who will thrive .
Many studies on attachment of children have been done since then , and it looks like ripping a child away from a mother is a formula for later conflict when mom tries to impose her standards .
The internal representation of the intermediate " fragment " of a node is the tuple , where and are number of lines above and below the root , and is an iterator over each partial line ( without spaces to the left ) .
A gene is a segment of nucleotides in one of the chains of a DNA molecule .
The most prevalent contemporary definition is that a gene is the fundamental unit that codes for a polypeptide .
According to this simple account , a gene is a sequence of nucleotides in DNA that is transcribed into a sequence of nucleotides making up a messenger RNA molecule that is in turn translated into sequence of amino acids that forms a polypeptide .
The reference or extension of a term is the set of objects to which it reference .
A leader is a shorthand version of the world in which he operates , a map of his times , the harmony ( if not the melody ) upon which those led by him can improvise .
Selecting a leader is no trivial pursuit .
A leader is a person who succeeds in giving expression to both these nuclei amply and successfully .
Now , having been to Ethiopia several times , I was aware that in her culture keeping your eyes lowered before an elder is a sign of respect .
In this sense a section is a twisted function .
Ask almost any experienced traveler , and she 'll tell you that one of the best ways to get around a city is the same way the locals do - via public transportation .
In the case of employment contracts a restraint is an embargo on the energy , activities and labour of a citizen and the public interest coincides with his own in preventing him on the one hand from being deprived of the opportunity of earning his living and in preventing the public on the other of being deprived of the work and services of a useful member of society .
" The welfare of a child is a wide concept .
For the purposes of this section , a person is a victim of an unlawful act only if he would be a victim for the purposes of Article 34 of the Convention if proceedings were brought in the European Court of Human Rights in respect of that act .
As a result , individuals were notoriously vulnerable to the whim of the majority : an example is the philosopher Socrates , who was tried and executed in 399 BC for allegedly believing in the wrong gods and corrupting the young .
One place that has helped me a lot is the Low Down .
The most prominent feature on a person is the face and often the eyes are the most distinctive .
I have considered whether such an objective is a legitimate basis on which to make the order asked .
The problem is that such a move is a one-off ( if we count the two operations as the same programme ) and we are left with the question what happens next ?
As these had been anticipated , they were dealt with promptly by the contractors as well as archaeologists , to whom the uncovering of a cesspit is an interesting find indeed .
White as an angel is the English child : But I am black as if bereav 'd of light .
We set off looking for and finding a small bird ( Robin ) , a big bird ( goose ) , insect ( butterfly - which surprised me that our 5 yr old knew a butterfly was an insect ) and finally a mammal ( squirrel ) .
" What kind of a prank is this ?
Two shillings a year was the cost and local collectors for the area ensured these subs were collected .
The rationale for such an approach is that a house is a capital good which provides a flow of services such as shelter and security of tenure .
As good a place as any for a murder is an isolated anti-aircraft post in wartime .
We decided a rest was a good idea and we started discussing what was better than this cave which had been called all names imaginable ( I 'll let you use your imagination rather than writing them here ) whilst we were talking another two Red Rose members appeared , Ian Lawton & friend ( sorry do n't know name ) .
A sleeper is an agent who is infiltrated into the enemy 's governmental apparatus , told to win as much power , influence , and trust as he can , and then simply to wait .
Being a mum is all about juggling - and two mums have become experts at balancing young children , the demands of everyday life and designing and developing a new product .
The Department accepts that the development of such a facility is a priority and the relevant section of the Report of the Working Group confirms that it took into account those matters subsequently relied upon by the applicant as relevant to Article 8 of the Convention .
An ophthalmologist is a doctor who usually works in a hospital ophthalmology department and who is qualified to treat diseases and injuries of the eye and to carry out any necessary surgery .
Most of the time he tends to be very tense because being a policeman is a very tense way of living .
Paul a bishop and a presbyter are the same thing , as St .
" My biggest thing in choosing a college is a place I could make a difference and get a chance to play as soon as I got there .
An address is a property list .
A mailbox is a property list .
( A transaction is a message and acknowledgment . ) A transaction number must be unique during the time which the message ( a request or reply ) containing it could be active in the network .
The use of rhino horn as a medicine is a status symbol in many parts of Asia , where the number of people able to afford the product is rising rapidly .
Lesson A pitch is a rehearsed presentation of a project intended for creation .
Lesson : Storyboarding A storyboard is a series of pictures that displays , frame by frame , the layout of the production .
I do n't know , being the director of a lab is a whole bunch of little jobs that you just have to keep on top of .
We 'd have one of the Ham[ilton] Standard technicians like Milt Garrison [ phonetic ] go in there and literally shave off or put a shim in with a borescope-that 's a little eyesight thing that you have-to try to make sure that there was no sharp edges , no ledges , no anything in there .
" and " If a class is an object , what class is it an instance of ?
In Smalltalk , a class is a proper object , but because of that , there 's a whole silly complex metaclass system .
A sandbag was a sack filled with earth from which defences were built .
For a systems guy , a system is a system , and the air supply was the air supply , but for a trajectory guy to see these new numbers that had never been seen before , as we started screaming out of Earth orbit and headed towards the Moon , was pretty exciting stuff .
Stage - A stage is that part of a cycle during which a particular set of phases receives green .
A bonus was the warm email I received confirming my purchase & shipping date .
A special spot in Berks to celebrate an anniversary is The Reading Public Museum , including a walk on the grounds ; then having a nice lunch out together .
L. Morton } fixed star PEACOCK .. which is quite appropriate considering that a peacock is a bird and that the peacock can symbolize a particular phase in the alchemical process .
I think also that Koussevitzky 's outstanding characteristic as an interpreter is the combination of fanatical discipline and heart , inspiration and flaming excitement , the freshness of that super-rehearsed umpteenth performance of a Brahms symphony .
A berm is a mound or wall of earth .
Answer EDA -16 : The Office of the Secretary will determine whether an applicant has adequately demonstrated that an area is an EDA .
Note that a circumconic through a point P has perspector on the tripolar of P. A circumconic is a parabola if and only if its perspector is on the Steiner inellipse .
Building a Team is a process .
lonniejockstrap wrote : Building a Team is a process .
[ quote ] [ p ] [bold]lonniejockstrap [ / bold ] wrote : Building a Team is a process .
Yeah , look , we 're talking about the guy who thinks in terms such as " bible science " and assumes criticism directed at his definition of a word is an attack on his faith .
The closest to a pilgrimage was an Iris Murdoch conference at her old college in Oxford a couple of years ago .
A firewall is a hardware device or software application that sits between your computer and the Internet and blocks all Internet traffic from reaching your computer that you have not specifically requested .
A coconut is a superlative gift , in response to the sprout ( singular ) and pomegranate ( singular ) that I have received in years past as gifts .
I 'm not sure I would say I adapt the OER in this case - unless you consider any document you use in a classroom is an OER ( which can be an option as well ) .
Title : Updating the computer Pages : 60 - 63 Author : Richard Carr Text : Updating the computer Designing a computer is a continuous process in which technological breakthroughs must be matched by new hardware , and new hardware by new software , without invalidating the systems already in use .
I still do n't think being a lawyer is a great introduction to real life , but I suspect it is a great deal better than being a ' political researcher ' .
Only if the receiver is machine-processed and yielding a response is this attack any good at all .
An algorithm is a procedure that has been specified in enough detail that it can be implemented on a computer .
impulses in the optic nerve fibres at each moment of scanning a scene are the answers , in code , to the " questions " that had been asked at the previous moment . .
She does n't get very far before she decides having a man be a fool over her is n't half bad .
In favour of such an interpretation is the fact that it appears so infrequently in the LXX of the canonical OT literature , which could be taken to indicate that although it was familiar to the then translators , it was inappropriate for what they were translating .
An example is the conquest of the Constantinople by the Ottoman Sultan Mehmet II , which brought an end to the Byzantine Empire .
Hi TJ : I meant the Robinson analogy as a response to the Finkbeiner test ( linked to above ) , which forbids , as one prong in its " simple " (!) seven-part test , mentioning that a woman was the " first to do X .
A role is a group , or type , of user that may have been granted certain privileges for performing one or more specific actions within an application .
A resource is the address of a media file .
Can a disciple be a true disciple and then not a disciple ?
An example is a golf club which adapt in real time to a persons tendency to slice or undercut their shots .
If you want to learn to manage your time effectively then a routine is a critical key to being able to follow through with your daily tasks .
A routine is a set daily habit of accomplishing your household tasks .
This gift of a savior is the greatest gift we could receive on Christmas day or any other day of the year .
Writing a resume is a pain .
" You also better be aware that your sons are being taught having a boyfriend is the " in thing .
So do n't start posting once a day , if you 're not gonna continue that after couple of week 5 times a week is a good starting point and then move up or down from that .
Such an undertaking is the benign equivalent of a permanent revolution-a task that never ends .
But that needs a proper design , to avoid the a drawer is a panel , but it behaves a bit differently approach .
A captain got up , a young captain said : " Goddammit , I 'd like to know who the son of a bitch was that took this magnificent airplane , designed to bomb from 23,000 feet and he took it down to 5,000 feet and I lost my wingman .
Francis Bacon and the boy dressed as a girl were a treat !
( 069257 ) In this case arising under the Conscientious Employee Protection Act , N.J.S.A. 34:19 -1 to -8 , is the employer entitled to a new hearing on punitive damages because the trial court declined to instruct the jury that a precondition to such an award was a finding that " upper management " actively participated in or was willfully indifferent to the violation of plaintiff 's rights ?
I assume a code is the only way but I am yet to find a reliable program that will put an end to this .
If a bulb is both tail and brake lamp , it must have two separate filaments and two separate external contacts .
The car is definitely a misprint and they wo n't sell at that price , quite a few stores ( like play , amazon ) will send the goods out and take the loss , but they are under no contract to as the price advertised online or in a shop is an invite to treat and they can refuse to sell at the advertised price .
A result was the change of logos from shipping companies with residence in Croatia .
I think nailing down a concept is the hardest part .
The other thing to consider is the fact that a logo is an identity which will appear on stationery , leaflets , a website , signage and other things for the world to see .
I have to watch her as she is a bit of a piggy being an ex abandoned one unf she was so quick , I never knew about conkers I know some sticks / bark can be poisonous .
and if a category is the same as the competition , they still dont do everything as they are more limited to certain categories like builders etc. Now business needs business , builders will need accountants , accountants need software etc etc , you get my point ...
A builder is a traditional service , and traditional marketing can have the best results .
The reception staff at the hotel were mainly ok but the outstanding feature that made our holiday such a success was the friendly attitude of the people that worked in the self service restaurant called Marrakesh and the aforementioned themed eating spots .
I mean £ 4.50 for a caravy is a very good price .
:| Try telling the people of Hiroshima , the a bomb was a deterent .
Peterson claimed Khan 's WBA and IBF light-welterweight titles in his home city of Washington DC in what was one of the fights of 2011 , but with the judge deducting him 2 points for pushing during the fight and the ' Mystery man ' Mustafa Ameen palaver at ringside , a rematch was the best outcome for all involved including the fans .
Installing a kitchen is a serious and permanent investment so it is worth taking time to try various plans and schemes before deciding on the final layout .
In front of a window is a good place to have a chopping board or a worktop so that food preparation can be carried out in maximum light .
nature of this reason for a hysto is all so vague and indefinate as there 's always the wait and see option .
And a hiss is a very serious warning to back the f * ck off !
Although both Heather and Michael admit that starting a course was a huge step , they both agree that the support they received by tutors in the community and then at the College made it an easy transition .
An early example of such an institution was the Nizamiyya madrasa established by the powerful vizier ( chief minister ) of the Saljuq ruler , Nizam al-Mulk ( died 1092 CE ) , in Baghdad in 1067 CE .
An example of such a group is the Ikhwan al-Safa cited earlier , and Muslim philosophers and scientists .
An example is the creation in Pakistan of the Aga Khan University , whose first initiative was a medical and nursing school of an international calibre to train physicians , nurses and health-care professionals to meet the medical needs of urban and rural areas through an innovative programme of training and a primary health-care system .
However a receipt is the best form of proof as it not only details how much you paid for an item but also when you bought it .
' is doubtless that a barrister is the cheaper option .
- Greatly improves one 's knowledge of the U.N. and International Relations in general - not to mention a good plus for your C.V. - Being in a club is a great social and educational university experience .
Communities 2.0 Public Engagement Officer Mark Smith said : ' To discover that we had been shortlisted for an award was a lovely way to start 2012 and recognises the hard work that the team has put in over the last year .
Not letting people take photos of a view is a bit like trying to claim copyright on water or cats .
A win is a win and ...
And as for going as cook , - though I confess there is considerable glory in that , a cook being a sort of officer on ship-board-yet , somehow , I never fancied broiling fowls-though once broiled , judiciously buttered , and judgmatically salted and peppered , there is no one who will speak more respectfully , not to say reverentially , of a broiled fowl than I will .
To dream of a seance is a warning not to let foolish pride stand in the way of accepting needed help .
A cartel is a group of hitherto rivalrous sellers of some product or service who join together to eliminate their rivalry .1 A cartel tries to fix price and other terms of trade thereby eliminating alternatives available to buyers .
Whether a genealogist is a novice or a professional , he or she seeks the answers to questions .
A cappella was the Pope 's introduction of castrated male " organic pipe organs " for the Sisting Chapel where instruments were not played in the Pope 's presence .
The threat of a fine is an aversive stimulus constantly present and acts as a deterrent .
Accidentally tearing a book is a punishment to those who possess socialized guilt feelings about public property , and results in suppressing the careless behavior that led up to it .
I maintain that an experiment is an investigation in which the experimenter attempts to test a hypothesis .
The railing of a staircase is an example of a type of balustrade .
Prints are reproductions or copies , of an original artwork ( sort of like there is only one of you and a photograph is a ' copy ' of you ) .
Forming and operating an LLC or a corporation is a bit more complicated and costly , but well worth the trouble for some small businesses .
What sets the corporation apart from all other types of businesses is that a corporation is an independent legal and tax entity , separate from the people who own , control and manage it .
" A mine is a task , " he says .
Where we have a choice is the following .
He also challenged individual classes to become St. Mary Word Millionaires " where every student in a class is a word millionaire , and these classes will be recognized by the Board and the community .
A slave was not a person , but a thing ; a person was a human being endowed with civil status .
Detention or naked possession of a thing was the mere physical faculty of disposing of it .
A testament was the legally declared last will in which an heir was instituted .
An action was the legal means for the enforcement of a right , and the Roman law included in the term actio both the right of action and the action itself .
A tag is a legal rule expansion ( a tag can also be declared in the grammar header - see S 4.1 ) .
By default a grammar is a single language document with a language identifier provided in the language declaration in the grammar header ( see Section 4.5 ) .
Activation of a grammar is the point at which the recognizer begins detection of user input matching the grammar and is therefore analogous to the action of visual or audio rendering of system output .
A document is a Conforming Stand-Alone XML Form Grammar Document if it meets both the following conditions .
If anything , the data points to the models slightly underrating those types of teams , and confirming the idea that , when it comes to winning more baseball games , a run is a run is a run .
While it 's true that a run is a run , you have to actually be able to score runs .
In the middle of the curve , I agree 100 % with " a run is a run is a run " , but 1 run is infinitely more than zero , so the bottom of the curve is pretty heavily weighted .
A run is a run is a run .
The mantra has been " a run is a run " for the past three years and yet the Mariners have been bad and offensively inept .
No one to my knowledge disagrees with " a run is a run is a run " .
I think the reason people object to the " a run is a run " argument is that they * think * that means " there is never a point of diminishing returns on defense " , when what it * really * means is , " we are not near the point of diminishing returns on defense " .
Looking at run prevention over appropriate sample sizes , one knows we 're dealing with fractions of a run being the difference between good run prevention and poor run prevention .
I guess I just highly doubt anyone in the front office is n't fully aware that " a run is a run " .
I do n't think anyone is denying that a run is a run is a run or having a great run differential will lead to more wins .
I 'll get through all of the comments one day ... but can I tell you how hilarious it is to see people talk about scoring " ZERO " runs as if that is some sort of an expectation ( or possible ) ... in the same sentence when they mention that they 'd rather see an 11 -9 loss ( as if averaging nine runs a game is any more realistic ) ...
A principal note of the Church is catholicity ; consequently , a man is no true member of the Church unless he is likewise a true member of the entire body of Christian believers and is filled with an ardent desire to see her take root and flourish in every land .
, L until the leaf ply L is reached ( a ply is the set of branches at a given depth ) .
Besides , a license is a necessity these days , so be brave , take a deep breath , and drive .
" Coming up with an idea is the easiest thing in the world ... writing it down , that 's the hard part .
The inner world in a way is the one that counts most of all .
A comet is a object which is made up of things water , dirt , frozen gases like methan .
They apparently do n't get that most films are made to be shown in darkened rooms to seated audiences and not as gallery installations , and that a video of a film is a reproduction in the same way that a photograph of a painting or a fresco is a reproduction .
I see the only alternative for a film to last in a viewer is the opposite : that it reinforces what the viewer already sees and believes , fostering an acceptance of how things are .
A cookie is a text file stored on customers PC to maintain an uninterrupted transaction with the application .
The return value in such a case is a negative value .
His humanitarian -- and politically motivated -- decision not to recognize the Taliban because 100,000 feminists signed a petition was a catastrophe for Afghanistan , the US and the world .
An example is the Vedalia beetle ( Rodolia cardinalis ) , a species of ladybird beetle that was imported into California in the last century to control cottonycushion scale on citrus .
An example is a parasitoid fly that lays an egg on a caterpillar , and the fly larva ( maggot ) that hatches from the egg burrows into the caterpillar and consumes it during a period of many days or weeks ; the fully-grown maggot turns into a pupa , and an adult fly emerges from the pupa - the adult fly feeds on plant nectar .
The people at the gym were enthusiastic and I thought that if they can fight through something then making a comeback is the least I can do .
Anyway a challenge is a challenge so thinking cap on :thumbs: Used to be the same for me in my last job - worked for an Ice Cream Company ...
Winning for the second year in a row were the team of Phil Hodges , Andy Watson , Jason Hodges and Jeff Davies with 79 points , one clear of Lee Wheston , Simon Bray , Darren Murrish and Steve Tunnicliffe , with Derek Parkin , John Doyle , Keith Trethewey and Rhaj Dhumale third on 77 .
Keim said , however , the issue for Australia as a nation was the contents of this document and other documents in which the Commonwealth had taken opportunities to outline the evidence on which action against Dr .
transducer A transducer is a device which emits sound waves and transmits them to a computer , resulting in an ultrasound image .
A microphone is a good example of a transducer as it converts mechan ...
Transducer A transducer is a device that converts one form of energy to another .
An inquiry is the only way to get to the truth .
Cusp [ dentistry ] A cusp is an occlusal or incisal eminence on a tooth .
Cusp [ singularity ] In the mathematical theory of singularities a cusp is a type of singular point of a curve .
Cusp In architecture a cusp is a triangular protection from the intrados of an arch , or from an inner curve of tracery .
:worried: Well not so , a Unit is a different world to Lympstone .
Austin where did you find that Black and White picture with the Pigs and K 9 s with 1 ton trailers , pictures of Pigs with a trailer are a rare thing !
If the cost to the applicant going direct to the lender or via a broker is the same it then gives him the choice to client to decide rather then entice them with lower rates for non advice Is the CML afraid of competition to there memebers ?
I know that a WC is the toilet , but what is the low-flush and why does it need to be mentioned .
when you get threatened by the law for speaking the truth , such as a spade is a spade !!!
Maybe call them " Chitcoms " - a chit being a receipt / note / voucher used as a statement of an amount owed of a certain product .
Tapestry A tapestry is a thick hand-woven fabric , usually of wool , with a pictorial or ornamental design formed by the weft-threads .
About the other stories I mentioned I 'll try to find the books where I read those stories - a comparison is a bit hard though , because there are different German translators for the stories as they were published at different times .
Such a situation is a total pile of stinky grobble and is most ungreebly !!!
A crisis is a time for change and education for a family .
The respondent maintains that the complainant has not shown that an inability to work more than eight hours a day is a real or perceived impairment .
Getting a story in the newspaper , hosting a kick-off event , or creating a flier are all ways to reach different groups .
MAULED BY REALITY : If , as the old saying goes , a neoconservative is a liberal who 's been mugged by reality , what does that make an animal rights activist when he 's mauled by a grizzly bear ?
One example how a religion is a mental disorder .
Wang pressed him for more details , but Beam insisted that a cease-fire was a prerequisite to other discussions .
" A variant is the name of his father Hun-Hun-Ahpu , " Each-one-a-Magician , " and some confusion is apparent in the Vukub-Cakix myth between the two names ; but as the AbbBrasseur de Bourbourg so justly observes , " these names are so symbolic in character that their absolute elucidation is impossible .
At one time a database was the application ; now it 's systems software that supports a variety of custom and off-the-shelf applications .
A synctask is the mechanism by which some administrative activities work such as creating and destroying snapshots or datasets .
An application was for employment A program was a TV show A cursor used profanity A keyboard was a piano .
Memory was something that you lost with age A CD was a bank account And if you had a 3 - in .
Cut you did with a pocket knife Paste you did with glue A web was a spider 's home And a virus was the flu .
If you 're poly , having a partner is no guarantee that you 've ceased to date ( though of course some poly people do settle down and stop dating at some point ) .
may be said , that a letter is the worst and most definite evidence to a man 's disadvantage that can be conceived .
They tell us , that the measure of a dissolution is an unpopular one .
So using this as a catalyst is a great idea , and can be the push you needed to get you on the path of a healthier lifestyle .
The name of the contributor when a contributor is an individual .
Reading , knitting , playing backgammon with a friend are all experiences that for me add value to my life , albeit in small ways .
It has been shown above in this chapter that the end is the all of the effect , that is , the all of use , and that the Lord is that end , and that it is from the end that a use is a use of charity .
It is the same with every use , because a use is a good .
How to Live Well Without Owning a Car is the first practical , accessible , and sensible guide to living in North America without owning a car .
A nickel is a lot more than 1 view is currently worth , so the motivation to remind people to tip will only be higher .
I also know from my career that a reference is no guarantee of credibility ; it simply means that someone else has said the same thing .
Prior to containerisation , loading or unloading a ship was a very expensive and time consuming task and a cargo ship typically spent more time docked than at sea .
A namespace is a collection of names , and it has a unique name : the uniqueness of namespace names is guaranteed by making them URIs .
In RDF , a property is an " attribute " ( in the general sense of the word ! ) used to describe that resource .
At what stage in the development of an embryo is the plane of symmetry determined ?
A watt is the way of measuring the rate at which an appliance uses the power available to it .
The one-off workshop or seminar series put on by a central organisation for the institution as a whole is a poor use of time and resources .
But our performance over a lap is the tree that hides the forest of the loss of performance of our tyres over the long runs .
According to the Project Management Institute 's A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge ( also known as the PMBOK® Guide ) , published in 2004 , " A project is a temporary endeavour undertaken to create a unique product , service , or result .
An arbour is a shaded seating area , open on only one side , and is a lovely addition to your garden .
A podium is a good result and the car felt pretty good so it 's a step in the right direction .
A pre-degree is a one or two semester course at the University which , when completed successfully , will guarantee you a place on the first year of a degree or diploma at London Met .
A second is the place for those who centre their activities on reforming mainstream higher and continuing education .
To me , a chassene was a joyous event attended by the parents and a few friends and defined by the restriction that you could sit on one with only one toches .
A collection is an aggregation of physical and / or electronic items .
SWP hanging by his feet from a door is The Pulse 's favourite .
Last thing I heard , a trophy is a big siver thing that looks good in a trophy cabnet , whereas 4th place means you 're a loser !!
A quotation is a fixed price and cannot be changed later by either party ; whilst an estimate is an educated guess on what the work might cost .
Like any issue , recognising you have a problem is the first step to dealing with it .
What truly surprises me is this : Unless a person is a proactive supporter of cannabis , they do n't ask questions .
Writing a prescription is a whole lot quicker than delivering a long explanation why it should not be written .
A flag is a symbol , a piece of fabric used to represent ideals , but it is not , in itself , the ideal .
How Thea did n't realize that the " girl " Tommy was referring to was Laurel is a mystery-she 's the one that blew the whistle on them in front of Oliver , so why would he already be with somebody different ?
Desire Creating desire in a consumer is all about understanding the target audience 's wants and needs and massaging consumer perceptions so they desire what you 're selling .
The plan , however , is not to take resources away from other efforts " - not allocating resources onto a project is the definition of " not support " .
Ow , of course it will : the value of an assignment is the right hand side of the assignment and thus it can be reassigned to another variable .
Obviously it 's not always possible to tell when the dad in an ad is a primary caregiver , but there 's been an increase in dad-centric TV commercials this year , with a move away from the doofus archetype of the past .
Because startups are hell , and a startup is the perfect convergence of a brilliant idea and a founder just crazy enough to stick with it through anything .
Finally , it 's fortunate that a weblog is a wonderful , alternate , and complementary forum in which to speak directly , thus by-passing the intermediation of formal media .
" Finally , it 's fortunate that a weblog is a wonderful , alternate , and complementary forum in which to speak directly , thus by-passing the intermediation of formal media .
But since the Times ' own reporter , Steven Erlanger , irresponsibly ennabled the spread of Peace Now 's misinformation , should n't a retraction be a free public service owed to readers ?
An example is the more than $ 2 trillion dollars to be saved from appliance standards revisions along with the associated carbon emission reductions .
A blog is a website that allows you to have a dialogue with an audience , either directly by general posts , or by giving an audience the ability to see the interaction between the blogger and one reader at a time .
They 're both useful tools in the area of personal identification , just as a screwdriver and a hammer are both useful , but designed to perform differently .
Since Leaving the Scene of a crash is a crime there will likely be consequences .
A shaman is a spiritual intermediary between the realms of the secular and the sacred .
$ 11 M a year is the going rate for young , star-in-waiting DL .
" It 's usually an individual challenge , so being the captain of a team is a bit different .
Are zombies limited to the living dead , or could a zombie be a creature infected with a mind-altering virus ?
However , $ 20.00 a month is a bit steep for me , so if I did $ 10.00 per month ( or how much for a lifetime membership ? ) would I be " cheating ?
Unquestionably , sending this case to a jury is a 230 loss , but how bad is unclear .
Buying a kitchen is a major home improvement contract .
Underlying this analysis is the assumption that the struggle to reclaim higher education must be seen as part of a broader battle over the defense of public goods , and that at the heart of such a struggle is the need to challenge the ever-growing discourse and influence of neo-liberalism , corporate power , and corporate politics .
Remember , a contract is a binding deal and while it may be tempting to spread those payments , be sure you will have the funds to keep up .
And a piano is a very different beast to a string section !
A year is a long time in politics as the saying goes .
An antibody is a type of protein ( such as the protein known as CD 3 ) that is produced by the immune system to recognise disease causing cells such as viruses and bacteria .
An auto-antibody is an antibody that recognises one of your body 's own cells .
An optician is a professional who is trained to test your eyesight and prescribe glasses that increase your ability to see .
A keyholder is a person is exactly what it says .
A party to a contract is a person to whom a promise is made , in return for which he provides consideration .
Bringing the Epsom Live 2012 series of music-concerts to a close are the Royal Philharmonic Concert Orchestra on 2nd August .
A corporation is a specific legal form of business organization , chartered by one of the 50 states and treated under the law like a person .
Issuing Bonds : A bond is a written promise to pay back a specific amount of money at a certain date or dates in the future .
A disease is a spacetime entity , and its social repercussions can only be understood when it is seen as such , knowing when , as well as where , it strikes .
A cookie is a text file , so cannot contain a virus .
One of the things that often sways me when buying a book is the blurb written on the back cover about it .
A cache is a temporary storage area used for the files fetched from the network so they can be reused .
For everyone the prospect of becoming a parent is both exciting and daunting and for Mary and Joseph it must have been particularly so .
In other countries , those without a religion are the majority or an important minority : they number 73 per cent in the Czech Republic , 72 per cent in the eastern part of Germany , 68 per cent in Ukraine , and 40 per cent in Hungary .
" When Mandela goes " has always been the big question in this country , and for others outside , convinced that a bloodbath is the only natural consequence .
And , if you did n't know , a burrito is the perfect pre-or-post bike ride fuel ...
The exact times I want to read magazines on a tablet are the exact times I ca n't .
The success of a translation is the convincingness with which it projects a foreign or past original onto a modern stage .
Bill Roberson , I -14 , who would support awarding points if a candidate is a city resident .
I do not believe we should offer hand-outs based simply on the fact an individual is a resident ... maybe 2 or 3 points for residency but nothing more .
But the poem is a perspective on a person and a person is a totalized perspective on all the others .
Booz Allen Hamilton is a corporation , and as ruled by the U.S. Supreme Court , a corporation is a person in the eyes of the law .
And there 's the enormous satisfaction of seeing a book go to where it 's really wanted , often a place were the book would be unavailable otherwise .
This article reminded me of two things : 1 ) I think being an expert is a relative term .
According to AdWeek , associating a scent with a brand is the latest retail trend .
Using only Bolshevik sources , I discovered that just as Marx stood Hegel on his head , so the Russians have inverted Governor Pinchot 's motto , " A forest is a crop , not a mine .
In music , a fugue is a polyphonic composition .
Also , I 've found that most writers I like a lot are a bit insane , so any insane writer recommendations are more that welcome ( I mean , if they can write ) !
Here is a GIF image of the solution ( it requires 114 " steps " to solve , where a step is a single traversal from one space to another be it by arrow or just traditional movement ) .
In the 41 - page opinion in a case brought by the Episcopal Church and its Diocese of San Joaquin , Fresno County Superior Court Judge Donald S. Black also said that " because a diocese is a geographical construct of the Church , it makes no sense that a diocese can ' leave ' the Church ; it does not exist apart from the Church .
A church is the Body , Head and Bride of Jesus Christ .
This biographical article about a mathematician is a stub .
With the ability to start a fire being a primary survival necessity , a single-handed fire starter is an important asset .
Similarly , an ambivalence is the meeting point of two properties that otherwise would remain distinct or opposed : cf. the epigram on the plumeless cock , which is Plato 's man ( Sarbiewski 1958 : II , 489 ; Smieja 1962 : 92 ) .
- A chief ' ( App 17 ) could with complete conformity to both the form and the content of Sotho proverbs become ' a chief is a tree on which all birds sit .
The ambivalent element in a riddle is the key to its solution , and this is precisely because through its ambiguity it can be seen to belong to two different conceptual categories at the same time .
They may be very simple or very complex : a reflex machine such as a thermostat is an intelligent agent , as is a human being , as is a community of human beings working together towards a goal .
On the Internet an Intelligent Agent or simply an agent is a program that gathers information or performs some other service without your immediate pres. ..
Warming up with a massage is a good idea .
If a man is a gentleman , he knows quite enough , and if he is not a gentleman , whatever he knows is bad for him .
Key to such an extension is the use of a decimal point to the right of the digit in the ones place .
The dynamic also true of the subwoofer to the extreme a igu.C is a beautiful sound that I hear or I rediscovered my recordings and also those of others as my CDs .
Indeed , he was still devoted to the study of chemistry , and had a laboratory of his own in which he used to shut himself up all day long , greatly to the annoyance of his mother , who had set her heart on his standing for Parliament and had a vague idea that a chemist was a person who made up prescriptions .
No , then how do you think a divorce is the answer .
That does n't argue for complacency in attempting the smoothest , slowest speed water touchdown you can manage but it strongly suggests that worrying about a flip-over is a misplaced concern .
It leaves out , however , three early works which are arguably her most accessible : the gRReat adventure , A Thought is the Bride of What Thinking ( Tuumba Press , 1976 ) , and A Mask of Motion ( Burning Deck , 1977 ) .
This obvious separation of one I from another is multiplied exponentially in Hejinian 's work .11 To consider the difference between idiosyncratic autobiography and the way Hejinian idealizes or linguistically reconstructs this life report , compare a passage from 1976 ( from A Thought is the Bride of What Thinking , unpaginated ) with what we might call the autographic translation in My Life .
) " ( A Thought is the Bride of What Thinking ) .
A Thought Is the Bride of What Thinking .
In traditional agricultural society , a city was the ruling class 's political base .
As other language certain practices are simply accepted by convention 2.1.3 A convention is a practice that has gained general acceptance over time by accountants and auditors .
The packing slip is enclosed with the goods by the supplier for the convenience of the purchaser 's employees in identifying the goods 3.2 JOURNAL 3.2.1 A journal is a book where accounting transactions are recorded chronologically according to the order of dates , with adequate explanation .
Posted by space be completed with the full name of the person posting the General Ledger and the date when the JV is posted 3.3 LEDGER A ledger is a book containing Accounting .
The prime factorization of a number is a product of primes that equals the number .
The GCF is also called the greatest common divisor ( GCD ) because when a number is a factor , it is also a divisor .
A raft is a significant investment , even the less expensive ones .
A raft is the best defense against hypothermia .
Hanging upside down on a pole is the highlight of my week .
The withholding of information about a child 's whereabouts by the state from a parent is a flagrant interference with the mutual right to respect for family life as between the parent and the child .
vii 1 , , is compared to a husband , so far as it is written in or revealed in the heart , that as a husband is the guide of the wife in her youth , so is the law to the heart .
Now a lie is a sin of all others most against knowledge , and indeed against a double knowledge , and so is this .
' In normal times , except for financial limitations which we hope will be removed in the future , the choice of an occupation is a free one , whatever the motives of the choice may be , and there is , happily , no authority possessing the power of directing anyone to become a teacher .
An eye for an eye is the solution to it .
' A car is the perfect place for germs to breed , especially if you eat in it and leave litter or uneaten food , ' says Dr Cutler .
His " cognitive " approach to understanding what scientists do leads him to choose an " agent-based " conception of modelling whereby the goals and purposes of an agent are an essential aspect of any model .
But what makes him a hero was the way he never gave up .
A journal is a recognised method of evaluating personal experience by reflecting on it .
In fact I often find that angry , personal vehemence in an argument is a sign that the person involved has serious doubts about his or her position .
A strength is the insistence and success of building on pupils ' self-esteem .
Whether that understanding was correct in relation to the sites in which their cousin , Thomas Gillespie , took an interest is another matter .
An amnesty is a good first step .
An amnesty is a solution in this case , where we all can agree that our immigration system has not worked properly over the past few years .
Some for example knows Britain better than some of us English , Scottish , welsh , Irish ... etc. I am one of the people who believe an amnesty is a solution if we want our immigration system to improve .
( 2 ) Otherwise , it is broadly the case that the more able children within a class were the least likely to be doing work that was sufficiently challenging .
( 1 ) One factor to be taken into account when making a choice is the teacher 's own strengths and interests .
Getting a bulls-eye was a true accomplishment on some of the more challenging targets .
COMMENTS : Most of it very good , the thing that spoilt it a bit was some of the distasteful ' jokes ' some of the ' comedians ' made , particularly Ben Elton and ' the two women ' .
To say I was not a royalist was an understatement .
A network is a structure consisting of actors ( such as individuals , groups , organizations ) which are direct / indirect partners of a firm , and are connected through different kinds of ties or relations ( both business and non-business ) .
If you ca n't bear the thought of someone else using your home as their own it 's unlikely that taking on a lodger is the right way for you to boost your finances .
O what a righteousness is this !
- But what a character is this ?
A corollary of this is that the surface of a conductor is an equipotential ( i.e. , constant ) surface .
Another way of saying this is that the surface of a conductor is an equipotential surface .
Since vanity-sizing wo n't be coming to a standardized and regulated tape measure near you , you can rest assured that an inch is an inch is an inch .
The substance of a speech is the chief thought or the principal thought that run through it .
A galette is a term used to describe various types of flat , round or free-form breads and cakes .
" The greatest source of a nation is the potential of its people .
We agreed that a variable is any term quâ term in a certain propositional function , and that variables are distinguished by the propositional functions in which they occur , or , in the case of several variables , by the place they occupy in a given multiply variable propositional function .
Let me be clear : I 'm a relatively new meditator , my practice is as regular as my Crohn ' s-prone bowels , and the closest thing I have to a guru is the one-eyed cat next door with a steadfast gaze .
An insurgency is a completely different animal from a civil war .
A terrorist is any person the Sate says is .
A poem is a naked person .
A network is the software and technology underneath the airline that makes it run .
We may observe , to begin with , that a constituent of a constituent is a constituent of the unity , i.e. this form of the relation of part to whole , like the second , but unlike the first form , is transitive .
( This view of an aggregate is rendered legitimate by the fact that an aggregate is a single term , and does not have that kind of complexity which belongs to propositions . ) With this the definition of a simple constituent is completed .
Alas , as we get up in life , and are more preoccupied with our affairs , even a holiday is a thing that must be worked for. To hold a pack upon a pack-saddle against a gale out of the freezing north is no high industry , but it is one that serves to occupy and compose the mind .
The industry as a whole is a very loving industry , but this level of giving back is refreshing .
A highlight is the reinstatement of the Sigma Pi Sigma honorary following a long period of dormancy .
A car is a lethal weapon in the hands of those who do n't consider the consequences .
It was off the cuff , I did n't watch the academy awards but I 've seen a kid be a cunt before , been a cunt myself too .
I know that we 're supposed to believe that calling a nine-year old girl a cunt is the worst thing ever , but it 's still amazing to me that with all the things in the world to be indignent about this is what people have chosen today .
The only thing worse than a bigot is a fucking phony who pretends to crusade for social justice and is CLEARLY only doing it for the personal attention .
A siphon is a tube commonly used to empty containers of liquid that are otherwise difficult or impossible to empty , such as fish tanks or petrol tanks .
A search in books found only a historical reference to an export from the Levant , which may have been a type of stocking or stocking material ; a search of the Web was almost as unrewarding but did find a note that a comash is a comma followed by a dash .
Unless your subject is flat , in which case a scanner is a much better idea than a camera , autofocus gets lost and has no idea on what to focus when you 're up close to a real three-dimensional subject .
In the chapter I drafted to introduce the volume I sought to clarify the theory of capitalism existing in the literature and to highlight ideas of Aghion , Kornai , Frydman and Rapaczynski that had surfaced at the EBRD .14 Here is a passage of the chapter arguing the long-termism of classic capitalism : The entrenchment of a manager is the most serious difficulty ...
To me , it does n't matter who 's who - if an artist is an artist , if a curator is a curator , if a curator is an artist , or the other way round - this is an old and very constraining narrative .
The Bottom Line : A cushion is a small balance ( $ 100 - $ 1,000 ) that you maintain in your checking account for the sake of avoiding overdrafts .
The only thing worse than a liar is a stupid liar .
Those are the sort of questions our sciences should be asking : how can both we and these frogs flourish in right relationship to one another ; how can we humans live in right relation to this river valley so that both we and the river and the salmon can all flourish -- rather than : what kind of a machine is a salmon in itself , or what are the mechanisms that make this forest tick ?
If a company is any good , it does n't need to remove workers rights because it will pick the right workers , and they will work hard to make the company a success .
Bikes : We understand that purchasing a bike is a major investment .
The only Tea Party that was ever worth a toot was the Tea Party that ran candidates for Student Government when I was in college 45 years ago advocating for the legalization of pot .
Giving a bribe is a crime .
A spreadsheet is all logic , and I 've used what-if scenarios in Excel to convince myself and others of the viability of outlandish , absurd outcomes .
( It may derive from an older phrase , to suck the monkey , to drink from a bottle , which was also used by dock workers in London for illicitly drinking brandy from a cask by inserting a straw through the bung . ) A stick was a shot of spirits , such as rum or brandy ; to knock it off was to knock it back , or drink it .
In a typical marine scenario , to the shore side of a reef is the silica mud of a lagoon and closer to shore is the sand of a beach .
Unless a puppy is an ideal example of his breed and in a professional breeding program , is a conformation show and / or performance prospect , or there are medical reasons to delay the surgery , spaying and neutering is highly recommended .
All the world 's an appWhat is the internet doing to our minds ?
" A bookstore is the most requested store that we get from our customers , " said Dan May , Chambersburg Mall manager .
A pilgrimage was a holy endeavor that all Christians were encouraged to undertake , but it usually involved a journey to a holy site , performing penance and prayer , then proceeding peacefully home .
I suspect the transformation happens when people forget that the enforcement of a contract is a state action , and as such , " liberty of contract " is in some respects a positive liberty .
A dimension is a name / value pair that helps you to uniquely identify a metric .
But what happens once a person is a " customer " , however your company defines it ?
Emigration as a family is another draw - U.S. citizens may apply for Green Cards for their parents when they turn 21 .
Per the linked story : " Emigration as a family is another draw - U.S. citizens may apply for Green Cards for their parents when they turn 21 .
" A household is the primary unit through which public services are consumed and taxes are paid , " in the words of the NRC .
The one area where I do think there may be a case for an inquiry is the Helmand mistake and I was interested in this discussion already people are honing in on that one .
And a biography is a biography .
The idea that the UN somehow prevents marijuana legalization has force solely because such a strawman is another convenient way for our governing elites to push against majority support for it .
George A. Selgin , a professor of economics in the Terry College of Business at the University of Georgia , would disagree about starting a war being a good way to stimulate the economy , but reasonable minds might differ ?
An interface is a special type of calculated configuration option .
The value of an interface is the number of implementors that are active and enabled , so in a typical configuration only one scheduler will be in use and the value of the interface will be 1 .
Games are fun , and many of us play them online , but sometimes repeated game requests when you log in to a site are an annoyance .
He wrote , " I passionately disagree that getting by on $ 5.87 a day is a picnic , especially for a single person .
" An intellectual is a person who 's found one thing that 's more interesting than sex .
A non-graduate is the group in the middle .
A vocation is a gift from God .
It is definitely not the appeal of American nationalism and politicizing the Olympic games through sport that is necessarily relatable ( although very true ) , as what people globally relate to through a broadcast is the meta-familiarity of heroic characters and universal structures of using sport as means of globalization ( for all countries ) .
The industrial partner must realize that there is no guarantee of a solution to a rigidly defined problem and that the time that students can devote to a project is a crucial factor .
For me , making a revival is a great responsibility .
Saul Alinksy , Todd Gitlin and many others say the first requirement for an activist is an objective vision , and looking at just the negative part of the picture is n't objective .
A word is any string of characters except the separator which defaults to space .
We need a complete solution for all scenarios , dragging in a file being the one that is " hard " , because dragging in bypasses the file open dialogue routines .
A photon is the smallest detectable disturbance as it is the amount of disturbance needed to move an electron to a higher orbital i.e. to gain Universal potential energy .
In the case of some of the projects we studied , students could have been told that forming and defending an opinion was the main task rather than the last question on the list .
A critic is a man with no legs teaching others how to walk !
The inability to lock a terminal is an invitation to unexpected and / or unwanted input .
The biggest immediate benefit of getting sun a few times a week is the reduction of cravings .
So whether it 's Bloomberg 's challenges - in some countries the most dangerous beat for a journalist is the war reporter .
I always thought a mimosa was an excuse to drink champagne before noon .
£ 1 bn a year is the estimate .
Wearing a mask was a bit restrictive but you could hide behind the character and scare a few children every night .
A judgment is a settled conclusion that a thing is good or bad , or that an act is right or wrong .
A judgment is a determination , or an assessment of some action or object or person .
This is the primary grace , and it becomes the greatest evidence that a person is a true Christian .
Marriage between a man and a woman is a moral and natural reality so profoundly woven into the fabric of human life and society that to undo it will probably be the undoing of our nation .
The family was still under canvas , but hanging on the branch of a tree was a worn and mud-stained skirt .
A beautiful interior in a schoolroom is a silent lesson in order and good taste .
Kynnersley that a quorum is a question asked at a meeting which the chairman is unable to answer .
An Insurgency is an instance of War where there is a degree of internal acceptance of values other than those that the Government attempts to allocate , but it lacks general external acceptance ( excluding general sympathies or the support of failed or failing states ) .
A voice is a basically a mixture of core ( thick folds ) , velvet ( tilt ) and brilliance ( twang ) , and every larynx and vocal tract is different , so even if every voice were perfectly balanced , they would still all be recognisably different .
A non-dependant is a person aged 18 or over who lives in your home or uses your home as their main residence on a non-commercial basis .
The conscience of an age is no safe guide to how we should live , the conscience of the majority , the conscience of the Nazi , the conscience of the cannibal are all uneducated consciences and we need the light and wisdom of Scripture to enlighten them .
A PINFOLD was a pound for stray animals .
A humanist is an atheist who rejects any thoughts of the supernatural , of a Creator , of the life of God entering our souls , and of life after death .
A strategy is a plan to meet business objectives .
A budget is the financial description of an action plan outlining how you will use your money , based on knowledge and assumptions against which you will measure your actual performance .
Certainly well worth a visit is the Costa Nord cultural centre , which is also home to the Sustainable Foundation of the Balearic Islands .
Particularly worth a mention are those at Alcudia held every Tuesday and Sunday , Andratx held every Wednesday , and Inca every Thursday .
An assumption is a condition , relationship or state of affairs which is regarded as true without actual knowledge that it is true or without direct supporting facts .
A mission statement for a firm is a broad statement of its direction and purposes .
I know , a win is a win , and I 'm really happy I won ...
A code is a solution to a coordination problem .
Such an exchange is a very happy one , where mud is given and gold received , light for darkness , the dignity of heavenly glory for earthly honors .
An aeroallergen is any airborne substance , such as pollen or spores , which causes an allergic response .
A context is a collection of management information accessible by an SNMP entity .
This is the case if an object is an element in a table .
A placement is the unique instance of a widget that has been placed on a web page .
THE toilette of a woman is an altar erected by self-love to vanity .
But for everyone else , maybe a computer is the best person for the job .
The mere knowledge and recognition of the presence of this extensive distribution of endothelium in bone-marrow not regularly functioning as a blood-channel is a step in the direction of the determination of its relation to the blood-cell production of the marrow and at least a presumptive indication for further studies , with this possible specific relationship as an objective hypothesis .
A memoir is a perfect way for someone like Linda Ferri to transition from screenwriting ( she won the Palme d ' Or at Cannes Film Fest 2001 for co-writing The Son 's Room with Nanni Moretti ) into novels .
Communication should be encouraged , as working with a computer is a great task for conversation .
Walking in the station had been bad but walking on an asteroid is a nightmare , let me tell you .
It gives an example of how an outline is a tree and how each aspect of your paper is like a specific part of the tree .
I think many are taught that a thesis is a single sentence , and the website addresses that appropriately .
Born with a male twin , a freemartin is a sterile cow with external female genitalia and internal male gonads .
The first thing you need to wrap a present is the wrapping medium .
Survey : A survey is a study of a phenomenon over / within a geographic region .
A signature is a few lines of text that are automatically added to the end of an outgoing message when it is sent .
In European folklore , a dragon is a serpentine legendary creature with two pairs of lizard-type legs and bat-type wings growing from its back .
An opinion is a person 's ideas and thoughts towards something .
Such an addiction is the last degradation of a free and moral agent .
Very often the program at the other side of a port is a C program .
Holding only the Queen and Jack in a suit is a common occurrence in numerous hands .
Returning yet again as a porter is the persistent Tenzing Norgay .
" A word was the cause of Sultan Mahmūd dismissing his vezir Hasan of Maymand , and confiscating all his property and banishing him .
There is no doubt that the establishment of such an infrastructure is a great challenge , but is there any alternative ?
Such a mess is the reward of good intentions ...
In a rural location , a car is a necessity and not a luxury when seeking employment .
A snapshot is a copy of a volume or file system created at a specific point in time .
Although she accepted him - defying her parents , who considered that , being ' trade ' , a publisher was an unthinkable match for their daughter - Norman unexpectedly died less than a month later , of pernicious anaemia ( a now-treatable blood disorder ) .
An acceptance is a ' final and unqualified expression of assent to the terms of an offer ' , which is analysed objectively ( Chitty on Contracts , chapter 2 -027 ) .
In contrast , the correct test when interpreting a contract is a question of what a reasonable person , having all the background knowledge that would have been available to the parties , would have understood them to be using the language in the contract to mean ( Chartbrook Ltd v Persimmon Homes Ltd & ors [ 2009 ] ) .
" A library is a hospital for the mind .
If a library is a hospital for your mind when the creative writing has broken you , an online literature source is , at the very least , a battlefield medic .
Express reference to the intent of a variation on terms that are important to the contractual relationship as a whole is the only safe way to avoid unintended outcomes .
Marx was right when he observed that the ideas of an age are the ideas of its ruling class , but there is a big difference between how these ideas were produced and disseminated in his day ( the pulpit was at least as important as the press ) and in a contemporary , developed imperialist society , where social life is saturated by vast quantities of words and images conveyed by the mass media .
A little bit every day as a habit is the best way .
An example is the use of private security in two West Yorkshire tower b locks which house residents from a variety of different backgrounds , including asylum seekers , the homeless and ex-offenders .
' The principle of the law was , that the execution of a person was the act of the whole nation , ' said the defenders of public execution .
Furthermore , the rules apply as much where a defendant is an individual as with a defendant company .
The notion that to be a lesbian is a revolutionary political act is extremely exclusive .
They deal with the violence around them , as a soldier and a neighbour are both shot with stoicism and humour , until Bernie 's friend is accidentally killed in crossfire between the British army and the IRA .
If a woman is a priest , she can also be a bishop : if she 's not , she ca n't .
The prestige value of an army is the sum of the prestige values of their own undemoralised commands .
The procedure for such an alteration is the same as that for the adoption of the Plan , involving public participation and possibly , a public inquiry .
This article regarding marin reserves , lundy as an example is a ntz .
Not until Cauchy , see Timoshenko ( 1953 ) , was it understood that the stress at a point in a continuum is a type of physical quantity that must be described by an array of numbers , stress components on planes at different angles through that point .
While Beltway media portray a dual effort by Republicans and Democrats to avoid a government shutdown , the unavoidable question must be asked : Has n't a shutdown been the GOP 's goal the entire time ?
Restarting Underwater Research Starting such a program is an enormously difficult task in a country where , until recently , there has not even been a single recreational dive shop .
A cat is THE most vital part of any garden !
What excited such a person was the total craziness of Heyerdahl 's enterprises .
Such an appeal is an effort by humans to re-describe their powerlessness .
The state tried to imply that his chambering a round was a predicate act of premeditation .
A palindrome is a string of characters that appears the same forward and backwards , such as " bob " or " 12344321 " .
Strictly speaking , a classic is any ancient Greek or Roman literary work of the first or highest quality - for example , the works of the Greek dramatist Sophocles and the Roman poet Virgil .
OK , perhaps calling it an upheaval is a bit extreme but , by now , you 've probably heard about the Photoshop CS 3 beta Adobe made available to current CS 2 users .
For many people , a home is the largest purchase they will ever make , but it need not be the most difficult .
Shaw questioned Nolte as to whether postponing a decision was an option .
That she was still a teenager was the perverse , circular logic by which she could be harshly judged .
The thing that was new was that the formation of a semicarbazone was an equilibrium reaction .
The premeditated death of a civilian or unarmed soldier by a military is a war crime , by treaties our country put forth .
And being an entrepreneur is a lot harder than it looks .
Typically , states perform the service , ultimately , because a state is the ultimate arbiter of who ( forcibly ) owes what to whom .
The process of creating a human is an everyday occurrence , but when you experience the birth of your own child you feel a love that is above any other within the natural world .
She explained that an embryo is a soul without a mind .
( In the fully observable case , the dimension of a model is the number of free parameters .
Whether a party has met its burden of proof on an issue is a question of law we review de novo , but in doing so we must accept LIRC 's view of the credibility of the witnesses unless we can say LIRC was wrong on credibility as a matter of law .
In CSS 2.1 a viewport is a feature of a user agent for continuous media and used to establish the initial containing block for continuous media .
Fanning canes of GJ on a fence is a good idea .
It may sound a bit nitpicking , but water sloshing in a bathtub is a gravity wave , water height in the ocean varying on decadal or longer scales must be totally different physics .
The primary disadvantage for an SRO forming as an LLC is the general unavailability of capital available to nonprofits : private foundations and government .
In a subclass is the process wherein the imine ( C ) # hashtagblank # # is formed by reacting an ethylene diamine compound A of the formula H 2 N ( CH 2 ) 2 NHR with a halogenated acetaldehyde or a halogenated acetaldehyde di-C 1 -2 alkylacetal .
An example is the Grateful Med , which provides a front end to the MeSH headings for subject access to medical literature .
Whether a person is " qualified " for a position is a question of fact .
In JavaScript always refers to the " owner " of the function we 're executing , or rather , to the object that a function is a method of .
Genie , I 'm sure that 's true , but even as much as I trust my SO , a nanny is a huge part of your life if you travel with her or she is a live-in .
For me an objection is a reason they are not interested in buying .
The student asking ' if they ca n't have kids , why did n't they die out ages ago ' is obviously doing a degree in nonsense studies at the university of staggering thickness - like many a student is a bright new egalitarian thickie higher education system then .
table-row ( In HTML : TR ) Specifies that an element is a row of cells .
The baseline of a cell is the baseline of the first in-flow line box in the cell , or the first in-flow table-row in the cell , whichever comes first .
On the World Wide Web a cookie is a block of data that a Web server stores on a client system when a user visits a Web site .
The computer 100 and Web server 120 contain a system bus 204 ; a bus is a set of hardware lines used for data transfer among the components of a computer system .
It 's counterproductive to their own efforts in some cases e.g. TLA , much as I hate to harp on them ) and it makes the publisher look bad if an advertiser is a content scraper or something of that nature .
The closest it gets to an apology is a " we regret the loss of life " and explicitly blames the victims .
So for example , while it 's true that the evidence suggests that Greenland was warm in the 30 's and 40 's , the evidence also strongly indicates that ( i ) the Arctic as a whole is a good bit warmer now than during the 40 's , and ( ii ) that Arctic sea ice retreat was minimal then , and much more significant now .
Because a loss is a loss is a loss .
Trees , grass , close up facial detail and any complex or contrasty areas of an image are the first to really pop with this processing technology .
Such a veto is an unethical and illegitimate usurpation of state authority designed to impose on all of society a particular religious faith .
How big a deal is this ?
If the president of a company is a workaholic , it is difficult to convince employees to be open to problems on the outskirts of their commitments .
( The use of the word " recession " to describe any contraction less severe than the Great Depression is a triumph of euphemism over clarity . ) A depression is an essential backup to efforts to moderate the business cycle .
A depression is a learning experience .
There is no secret recipe to speak languages fast , but with a commitment you can achieve any possible goal , traveling abroad to learn a language is a good idea , but that 's not available to everyone , that 's why I think that learning languages online is the second best choice , I made this website to offer visitors free lessons in 7 languages .
As soon as I saw the second hit , I KNEW it was n't an accident-this was an act of war against the United States .
Such a man was the unlettered savage , TECUMSEH , and such a man have the Indians lost forever .
A link is a relationship .
why , if a child is a perfectionist , and gets upset when something is n't up to their standards of perfection , would " Natt [ cut ] off all the erasers of [ Nyas ] pencils in her classroom , " and then " [ want ] them to understand that it was OK if something is n't perfect sometimes ?
Simplified Employee Pension Plans ( SEPs ) - A SEP is a plan in which you make contributions on a tax-favored basis to individual retirement accounts ( IRAs ) owned by your employees .
The key to determining whether an individual or an entity is a fiduciary is whether they are exercising discretion or control over the plan .
As an example , assume a landowner is a beef producer and wants to plant a forage mixture of big bluestem , Indian grass , and little blue stem at a rate of about 9 lbs of pls / acre .
Once a holder is a little ways into the scanner throat , the feed motor starts up and pulls it the rest of the way in , and then moves it back and forth a bit until it 's properly registered and ready to scan the first frame .
While it might seem very difficult , focusing on one goal at a time is the most powerful way of achieving your goals .
In kinematics , a mechanism is a means of transmitting , controlling , or constraining relative movement ( Hunt 78 ) .
A machine is a combination of rigid or resistant bodies , formed and connected do that they move with definite relative motions and transmit force from the source of power to the resistance to be overcome .
One of the basic relationships for a gear is the number of teeth , the diameter , and the rotary velocity of gears .
Unless one somehow thinks a bullet is a good thing , nothing good ever came from the barrel of a gun .
" The idea that pay discrimination is a myth is a myth in and of itself , " says Fatima Goss Graves , vice president for education and employment at the National Women 's Law Center .
Do you believe that half a truth is the truth ?
There is a really persistent image that a scientist is a guy ( with bad hair wearing a lab coat ) I suspect this means that when asked for a list of science sorts , many of our brain , irrespective of the gender of the body they inhabit ) pull up the pattern of guy , bad hair , lab coat and start matching - and suddenly a list pops out that starts with the guys .
" A knol is an authoritative article about a specific topic .
A classroom is a laboratory and teachers are chemists constantly tinkering , experimenting , and mixing things up until they find the right combination that works for them .
If a person is a witness to a perceived crime they should not talk to anyone but law enforcement and record on paper exactly what they saw .
On the Web , using Java , the object-oriented programming language , an applet is a small program that can be sent along with a Web page to a user .
In computer video display technology , a frame is the image that is sent to the display image-rendering devices .
In computer programming , a script is a program or sequence of instructions that is interpreted or carried out by another program rather than by the computer processor ( as a compiler program is ) .
We frequently use the term authority on our site when we talk about inbound links , as in " a link is a vote of authority .
I 've talked about the distinction between the two elsewhere , but essentially a startup is a new business designed for scale .
Those who did not buy a ticket were the odd ones out .
It starts at a point before arrest and finishes with post-custodial reintegration , and a review of such a system is a very difficult and complex task to undertake .
In order to ensure that both versions of Exchange could still be backed up successfully in the limited time available each night a defrag was the obvious solution .
I think a cone is the best shape for a house , the surface area where the air is hottest is the smallest .
For many teachers a lecture is a performance ; a creative act of original work designed to be seen and enjoyed .
But for want of firmness and from the great desire to send out the full quantity of coal , neglected to send the men out until the working places were made safe , preferring to let all the daily operations to go on until a more favourable opportunity turned up to remedy the defect , when an explosion is the consequence , and the blameable and blameless are together hurried into eternity .
An example is the National Stadium in Kingston , Jamaica .
An alternative is the Plank Oak nest of three coffee tables , which includes a large rectangular table with a small square table stored under each end .
Formation of three provinces consisting of Kurds , Sunnis and Shias forming a confederation is a possible solution to the ongoing violence in Iraq .
364 A benchmark is the institution 's expected performance taking into account the average of institutions of similar type , the profile of entry qualification of its students , the subjects they studied , and their age .
A quality control indicator for how cases are brought to a conclusion is the fact that RCMP Divisions successfully concluded 100 % of the 2,885 files related to key terrorist groups , within the established criteria .
The greatest factor in the encouragement of eventing as a sport was the establishment of the Badminton Horse Trials on the Duke of Beaufort 's estate in Gloucestershire in 1949 .
The last ' background ' special on a page is the one that gets used , and is used for the whole of the page image .
" Frankly , the woman I wanted her to have as a companion was a trained nurse .
A spermatozoon is the scientific name for a motile sperm cell .
The last homicide in North Richmond that resulted in an arrest was the April 2012 killing of 22 - year-old Lonnie Peterson III , who was sprayed with bullets as he stood in front of a corner store .
Suffice it to say , a book where a torturer is the hero , and where that hero 's use of torture is always benign , can hardly be anti-torture in any meaningful sense .
The choice of a syllabus is a major decision in language teaching , and it should be made as consciously and with as much information as possible .
" Maybe a mandate is the way to get there more quickly , " she says .
F 27 cummings , " ' next to of course god america i " R and " a salesman is an it that stinks excuse " [ X ] M 30 Dunbar , " We Wear the Mask " R ; Cullen , " Incident " ; Langston Hughes , " Harlem " GARLAND LAB SESSION : Meet at the Microcomputer Lab in Garland Hall .
A hematoma is a collection of blood that is pooled in the scrotum .
The tunes are all the same , and the tune that comes after a tune is the same tune that 's come after it for years .
But the great friendships of a lifetime are those that do not have the colour of football shirts .
Dr David Hirsh , from Goldsmiths College in London , welcomed the latest vote , saying : " A boycott is a tokenistic gesture which does more harm than good .
Being an elder is a leadership position ; some members do n't want to be led , they want , without sufficient qualifications or maturity , to make unilateral decisions .
While buying someone coffee or a soda is a great idea , just smiling and saying hello or asking someone struggling with loading groceries or crossing the street can be a blessing in their day as well .
As I have mentioned elsewhere a photon is the disturbance needed to move a electron in space .
" A carpenter is a skilled craftspersons who works with timber to construct , install and maintain buildings , furniture and other objects " .
More than this it asks how an idea be both tolerant to individuality and also to collectivity , without polarising them .
And this is a disease where one death in a family or a community is a death for the world in the AIDS community , and that 's what we 're all about at this meeting .
As I ask Roy , where does that dimension of ' time ' actually physically exist , if our only evidence of the past is its physical record in the present and the only proof of a future is a projection of the current state ?
A theory is a distilled principle and everything is n't everything if its distilled .
For our bodies , a moment is the matter equivalent energy of a heartbeat .
' Pressuring an ally is a very effective tool in foreign affairs .
It 's seems to me that using an adblocker is the same choice I make when I forward through the ads on commercial TV or choose to arrive at a cinema ten minutes later than the advertised start time .
Less of a surprise was the announcement of Jeff Bridges for the male lead .
The bank handling the transaction as a broker is the only entity knowing the identities of both parties .
A camera is a camera is a camera-it 's how you use it that counts .
I would only recommend opening / closing cards if buying a house is a ways off .
Maybe the politician who chose to be dishonest with her constituents and the country at large by possibly pretending to split up with her husband after he was found guilty of accepting a bribe is the reptile , no ?
The process of cycling a tank is the process of growing enough bacteria to turn the waste ammonia into nitrite and then into nitrate , so that the ammonia and nitrite levels stay at 0 ppm constantly in your tank .
i really dont know why people are knocking a venue like this , plz shut up , i come from a place where a double is a massive fish-id die to fish a venue like thorpe !
A disease is an illness or condition that interferes with normal body functions .
Anyone here been in a situation were the other party has not reported an incident ?
Martin , Chronic Fatigue Syndrome is CHRONIC ... developing it once a year is a contradiction in terms .
Most of the above comments say effectively " saving as a pension is a good idea " .
In 1996 , a three judge court threw out election results and ordered new elections with new district lines after plaintiffs successfully brought a claim that a district was an unconstitutional racial gerrymander .
Note that this is not a certainty-it 's an educated guess .
The more simple an idea is the more wide its applicability .
Resorting to junk food simply because you have n't taken the time to plan a meal is a sure-fire way to set yourself up for failure .
A brand is a customer 's perception of product or service .
, A tissue is a group of cells that together does a specific function .
The addition of Ice-T as a narrator was a nice touch , keeping the movie as far away from the " old fat white guy " stereotype as possible .
Whats that saying - a conservative is a liberal mugged by reality .
A liberal is a conservative who 's never been mugged .
A conservative is a libertarian who 's never been arrested .
A feed is a collection of posts , typically listed in reverse-chronological order .
If you are looking for a bird to bring joy , love and fun to your life , then a cockatiel is the bird for you .
Just for redundancy 's sake , a voxel is a volumetric representation of a pixel , as seen in popular videogames like MineCraft .
On the surface , it may seem that reading an article on a website is an emotionless experience , but science tells us that we use emotions to inform our understanding .
A thoroughly engaging narrative about the intersection of race and culture , identity , economic disparity , and education , This Is Not a Test is a must-read for parents and educators who want to understand , truly and deeply , the challenges inner-city students face .
Student debt and the ability to make a living were the most commonly mentioned barriers to providing care to the underserved .
A drought is a period of unusually dry weather that persists long enough to cause serious problems such as crop damage and / or water supply shortages .
A writer is a writer .
If a corporation is a member of an affiliated group of corporations filing a consolidated tax return , the division will treat the corporation as selling electricity to an unrelated person if another member of the affiliated group sells the electricity to the person .
Event organising bears a heavy weight on your shoulders , managing a budget which is best part of your mortgage and the expectation of it being a success is a lot to carry by yourself .
A better analogy than an island is a plastic soup , with debris found throughout the water column .
A biopsy is the only sure way to diagnose lymphoma .
A microdomain is a very limited set of problems , but is ideally selected in such a way that it is able to demonstrate the essence of human creativity , so that elusive concepts such as elegance , absurdity , lameness , fun , and so forth , can be modeled .
A micron is a millionth of a meter .
A block is the unit of modularization in Cocoon ( in comparison : Eclipse uses the term plugins , OSGi bundles ) .
A way to determine if a lump is a benign cyst is to perform another imaging procedure called an ultrasound .
A pacemaker is a small device , about the size of a wristwatch that helps regulate your heart rate .
In a CNS model , a field is a numerical quantity that is associated with the model , a layer ( or group of layers ) , a single cell , or a single synapse .
A kernel is a function that gets called separately for every cell in the network .
A copyright is the exclusive privilege of publishing or copying an original writing or composition ( Wheaton v. Peters ) .
( B ) If a woman is the subject of a non-spousal artificial insemination , the donor shall not be treated in law or regarded as the natural father of a child conceived as a result of the artificial insemination , and a child so conceived shall not be treated in law or regarded as the natural child of the donor .
Before this discovery , the oldest remains of a structure were those at Terra Amata in France , from around 200,000 to 400,000 years ago ; see artist 's conception .
SPOILER ALERT SPOILER ALERT SPOILER ALERT SPOILER ALERT SPOILER ALERT SPOILER ALERT SPOILER ALERT SPOILER ALERT SPOILER ALERT SPOILER ALERT SPOILER ALERT SPOILER ALERT SPOILER ALERT " The thing that 's crazier than Academy Award winner Adrien Brody fuckin a monster is the way the movie treats him afterwards .
The size field of a rect is an NSSize , which holds a width and a height .
An emergency is any serious medical problem ( chest pain , seizure , bleeding ) , any type of fire ( business , car , building ) , or any life-threatening situation ( fights , person with weapons , vehicle accident with injuries , etc. ) .
A resume is a work in progress ... constantly changing as your experience and skills change .
Sometimes , all you need from a show is that warm , fuzzy feeling .
( 1 ) Except as otherwise provided in divisions ( B ) ( 2 ) , ( 3 ) , and ( 4 ) of this section , unlawful sexual conduct with a minor is a felony of the fourth degree .
( 2 ) Except as otherwise provided in division ( B ) ( 4 ) of this section , if the offender is less than four years older than the other person , unlawful sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree .
( 3 ) Except as otherwise provided in division ( B ) ( 4 ) of this section , if the offender is ten or more years older than the other person , unlawful sexual conduct with a minor is a felony of the third degree .
( 4 ) If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of section 2907.02 , 2907.03 , or 2907.04 of the Revised Code or a violation of former section 2907.12 of the Revised Code , unlawful sexual conduct with a minor is a felony of the second degree .
( A ) In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is a brothel , evidence as to the reputation of such place and as to the reputation of the persons who inhabit or frequent it , is admissible on the question of whether such place is or is not a brothel .
( B ) In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is a prostitute , evidence as to the reputation of such person is admissible on the question of whether such person is or is not a prostitute .
Have you ever stopped to consider that the addition of methyllithium to an aldehyde is a formal insertion of the carbonyl group into the Li-Me bond ?
( Small operations would share a computer with other departments , and the composers probably had to work in the middle of the night to get adequate machine time . ) Creation of a piece was a lot of work .
An exception is a good German Riesling which can stand up to spices .
(b)the measurement of a dimension is a reference to the measurement of external dimensions ; and
the measurement of a dimension is a reference to the measurement of external dimensions .
Sounds easy , but owning and caring for a horse is a big responsibility that each owner must be prepared for. So , where do start to learn about what it takes to have a healthy horse ?
Worth a mention are the Virburnum Plicatum shrubs in full flower , one at the entrance to the castle , and the large Laburnum near the wild garden gate - displaying its full golden glory .
Kaye McIntosh , the magazine 's editor , said : " Babies change your life financially in a way nothing else will but having a baby is the best thing that will ever happen to you and you cannot put a price on that .
While it is true that , as he claimed in a recent interview , ' everyone who writes a poem according to a formal constraint is accepting a contrivance ' , it is also true of a poem written without any formal constraints - because the decision to therefore call it a poem is a contrivance .
An opinion is no doubt appropriately called a dogma , harking back to the Greek , but today it means a doctrine held only on authority , and doctrines are the opposite of ever-shifting , they are usually permanently fixed as God-given truths .
A Hemostat - A hemostat is an instrument that is used to hold on to a wire as well as a stainless steel or rubber ligature tie .
A Weingart - A weingart is an instrument that is shaped like a pair of pliers .
What an earth is a Luddite Party doing in Silicon Valley ?
Because some people object to being arrested ( and I think carrying a gun is a fair indicator ) , the Police are rightly permitted to use resonable force to do so .
I think Hannah from Once Upon a Time was the one who said I need to get a separate box for my review copies but I keep forgetting it !
he strongest source of microwaves in a home is a microwave oven with a damaged door seal .
Get real guys , buying / selling a home is a very serious matter and deserves a high quality service for which people will pay proper fees .
" " Perhaps a sibyl is a type of oracle .
Just as a minx is a type of young lady , but not all young ladies are minxes .
An enterprise is a collection of sub-organizational divisions working together .
The NYU economist Paul Romer , among others , has observed " a crisis is a terrible thing to waste , " and the organized Jewish community has taken note .
Under this definition , an intervention is a subset of game theory 's concept of strategy , where the game must include multiple stages .
Suppose $ \ coll a b$ is an eigenvector of $P^T$ with $ 0 \ leqslant a \ leqslant b $ .
If an individual is a member of more than one team or organisation , the applications made by the team or organisation that the individual is part of must be substantially different from other applications the individual is involved in .
As a whole , persuasion knowledge acts as a source for targets when evaluating whether a message is a persuasion attempt .
3.7 A model is the most important building block of MAML programs .
Similarly , whether a person is a first-time or return visitor to a web site may be important .
A toponym is a place-name descriptive of the place .
Even now , the process for acquiring and using a drone is an arduous one , meaning that drones are only used for the most dire of national security purposes .
Generally , a winepress is a large circular or rectangular structure .
A motive is an inner desire to actively fulfill a need or want ( Deci & Ryan , 1985 ; Papacharissi & Rubin , 2000 ) .
Its use of Dante 's Paradiso as a template is a major difference , with structural ramifications that have some effect on the local texture of the writing .
Using replay compilation and measuring the second iteration of a benchmark is a good way to produce results with low noise .
added a mapping test to see if an object is a dict or an object with a similar interface .
If you are working on a non-Athena machine with OpenAFS , the details may be different but the concept of running software out of a locker is the same .
Spatial ecology is the understanding that an environment is a holistic unified thing .
An avatar is a profile image you can have assigned to your email address when you comment on avatar-enabled sites .
Basically , a permalink is the web address used to link to your content that is permanent , and never changes - that 's why they 're called permalinks .
The formation of social structures in a population is a complex process .
Thus the neighbourhood of a node is the set of connected nodes at arbitrary locations within the system .
Yes : Tormato ( 1978 ) , * 1 / 2 Yes , as the cover demonstrates , a tormato is a tomato + a tornado .
A Muhtadir is a dying person .
I remember building up the letters of William Carlos Williams ' " A poem is a small ( or large ) machine made of words " early on .
A disadvantage is the fact that there is no mode of correction other than to reset the whole line .
They want a personal approach because ultimately a blog is a personal thing .
" A riot is a protest of the unheard " And surely as the older generation we should be able to see that this new wave is not a direct cause of parenting or soft laws .
Having a baby is a major life event , and early influences - even before birth - have consequences for life-long health .
A patio or a terrace is an ideal way in which to indulge your interest in gardening while at the same time creating a pleasant and relaxing environment for outdoor living .
One of the great benefits of being a doctor is the development of geographically transportable skills .
Also a bestseller is The End of Patience , by the late judge Kirsten Heisig , which makes an appeal for tougher sentencing .
The wide area is Eelmoor Flash ; a flash is a swamp not a winding point .
Treating your blog as a column is a good way to look at it .
( note that a prize was a return ticket to Cyprus ..!
The functions of a system are the only source of requirements , from which all structural features are derived .
A city is an accretion of the achievements and struggles of its citizens in built form .
Such a course is the only possible mode left to me of acting , unless I had at once written to you to remove Airey and Estcourt .
Adding FBW to a system is an easy thing ... making that airplane be able to take a 2 g landing time , after time , after time without the wings falling off ... now , that is another thing ...
A lodging is a single room in a private house with a resident landlord .
A mosquito is a very small thing , and the teenagers libido must therefore be the opposite .
A tuberosity is a rounded bony protrusion at the back of your last molar located at the upper jaw .
But once mastered , a combination is a lot safer than any solo machine , as you simply cannot take liberties with it .
' Driving ' an outfit is an art .
A weir is an overflow-type dam used to raise the water level of a river or stream .
A millrace is a water channel cut for the purpose of conducting water to or from a device , such as a waterwheel or turbine , for the purpose of producing power .
A cookie is a simple text file that will be discretely placed in the computer 's hard disk when it gains access to certain websites .
A map is a scaled representation of a portion of the Earth 's surface as if viewed from above .
A catafalque is the raised base on which a coffin rests before and during a funeral service .
Even more of a coincidence is the chassis number of 1557 , just two less than the white example featured in ' Pitbox ' in Nov 06 .
There was support for the earlier datum of Viscount Haldane in Lennard 's carrying Company Ltd v Asiatic Petroleum Company Ltd he had contended that : " a company is an abstraction .
One day perhaps I will build a new boat with a bigger boiler as a pound is a lot of stainless tube .
A wildcard is an asterisk ' * ' which in PC language means literally anything .
As well as first-class learning resources , we provide excellent teaching by suitably qualified and experienced professionals , so that learning a language is both enjoyable and rewarding .
Unusually for me , a motor was no problem as I had an equally unidentified four stroke of roughly similar vintage that looked as if it would be about right .
If anything , it was too loud for one very small and cosy pub gig so I had to tickle the bass drum which seemed a shame is this is clearly built to be played with full fervour so this is by no means a fault with the kit !
Notice that the sidewall of a Viking is a single piece joined together at the neck block .
Editing video recordings , shot on a camcorder is a relatively new accomplishment for the PC .
A botnet is a collection of remotely controlled and compromised computers known as bots controlled by a bot master / botherder that installs software ( typically malicious ) on the bots computer and performs acts , nearly always criminal , using the innocent bot computer .4 All the while , owners sit complacently unaware of the demon seed residing underneath their keypads .
Once a computer is a bot , it can be used in every illegal function of the child pornography distribution chain .
An informational-RFC is a working draft that is intended to become an RFC , then a proposed standard and possibly a standard .
A walled-garden is the equivalent of being pulled over while driving for having a vehicle that , unbeknownst to you , is unfit and dangerous .
In this context , he said , for the Church , her presence on the Internet " more than an opportunity is a necessity , " as " without this presence she would not succeed in entering into dialogue with thousands of young people , primary actors in this reality , given that she would remain antiquated .
If you are re-raised all-in then you face another tough decision , but a fold is the far more likely outcome .
The reason being that this would be a good way of illustrating how far they had already come , at a point were the young person might be feeling low in confidence about starting a new learning opportunity .
An outline is The starter is CAN controlled from the drivers side N 10 / 1 SAM and fuse box , this is all can coupled to the K 57 / 2 aux battery relay , the K 75 cut off relay , and starts off at the KEY .
MY best business advice summed up in a phrase is this : Do what you know More practicably it 's this : When you have that first idea Is there is a market for it ?
It is to be noted that it was a popular belief in ancient times that to wed with a rush-ring was a legal marriage , without the intervention of a priest or the ceremonies of marriage .
honda cr 85 had full engine rebuild a month ago hardly been riden all runs like a beaut is a clean motocross any info needed please just ask comes with new helmet , gloves boots body ...
Well I 'm at home most days anyway and very very rarely go away ( bi annual long weekend trips to liverpool ) so having to flick a switch is no trouble at all :) I 'll definately put a good substrate in both tanks just on the off chance I do n't go with EI in either of them .
An example is this page you 're on .
Kilianus a Scot being a moonke , was martyred in Germanie about the yeare of our Lord six hun|dred three score and nine , as hath Gesnerus out of Bale , but Lesleus affirmeth him to liue in the go|uernment of Ethsinus , which died in the yeare of our Lord seuen hundred thrée score and two , being the thirtith yere of his reigne .
If you 're going to need to buy EVERYTHING , an iMac is a good option , especially a refurb which is cheaper but aesthetically brand new and carries the same warranty .
Having a child is a key event in everyone 's life , but arranging life insurance does not always top the to-do list .
For Folk 's Sake said that the album is a : ' Deliciously dark , atmospheric and cinematic , Moving A Body is a ...
TARIQ RAMADAN : Yes , I think that , you know , my position on this is really , from the very beginning , what I said is a very-it 's a bad good idea , because of the symbol , and I knew who is behind the project and who is supporting that .
Fundraising in S.A. without a permit is an offence against the law .
The laughter of a child is a life-giving thing .
The one and only down side to such a jacket is the physical weight of it .
Go inside , to the right of a street is a hall , or slot machines .
He knew such a thought was a mere dream .
It is rather irrelevant for this review , but is there a proper definition , when a band is a band , and when a collective ?
A vent is an opening at the Earth 's surface of a volcanic conduit .
An example is the rasmus Mundus Master 's degrees in Journalism and Computational Mechanics .
Diehard music fans might frown at purchasing a ' best of ' as an introduction to a band ; it represents a commercial venture that has no respect for an album being an artistic entity in its own right .
A sandbox is an area where you are literally free to play with an application .
And happiness at a moment is the moment 's overall hedonic character , not a sum of individual pleasures it contains .
That is the attitude , in opposition to the whole history of intelligence , that the response to a question is a speech of diversion .
Fresh air and exercise create healthy appetites and Helmsley 's pubs , tearooms and restaurants are extremely inviting - worth a mention is the Black Swan for fine food amid swish surroundings .
Adrian Snook : I did n't fully answer the question that the gentleman asked me and I just wanted to say that the prerequisites for a solution are the recommendations in my evidence .
Personally , where I feel it tumbles a bit are the lyrics .
A strength is the quality of relationships upon which a thriving learning environment is built .
Getting over took by learners on a hill is no fun !!
:) Go for it :smileodf: As said many times buying a dartboard is a mine field and is a frequent question to which is the best .
no tax on 2500 litres per year 50 litres a week is a lot to get through .
In my opinion-with respect-it is extremely out of date to say that what is wrong in such a case is the fact that the prison is private , whereas when another prison is criticised it somehow does not matter so much because it is public .
Tucked away in a hangar was a Douglas A -20 Havoc ' Hell n Pelican ' , restored from pieces recovered in New Guinea and held at Amberley until such time as Papua New Guinea can provide a suitable museum building for it .
An obstacle is a wall to progress Somehow you need to make steps to climb over this obstacle and break this habit .
uriblank A bunion is an enlargement of the joint at the base of the big [ ...
The basic definitions of the Bill confirm " a person is an approved mental health professional if he falls within a description specified by the appropriate Minister in regulations " .
And of course nothing about the results is guaranteed at all ; you may or may not get a degree , depending on whether you choose to pursue one and how well you demonstrate mastery , and of course a degree is no guarantee of a better life in any tangible way .
package , packaging - A package is a wrapped , boxed , or otherwise contained object .
" A loop is a short cut through a main trail .
The very people with whom we have been associated in our early childhood , such as parents , sisters and brothers , playmates and other companions , as a rule are the very people whom we have met in the previous or one of our previous incarnations around our thirtieth year .
The Utopist needs no knowledge of facts : indeed such a knowledge is a hindrance : for him the laws of social evolution do not exist .
If a driver is a dick , kick him out .
An example is a proposal to scan PostScript files on the Web for illegally embedded fonts by name and by reverse-engineering pirated outlines .
Down a step was the sitting area - a two-piece round rattan sectional with blue cushions and glass coffee table , and a big rattan chair with ottoman .
A bowl is a much better choice than a sink , which can harbor bacteria and be difficult to clean .
An exciton is an electron-hole pair .
Seriously : An SSD is the most noticeable upgrade you can make with a PC , speeding up everything from boot times to application loading to file transfers speeds .
Such a thing is a very bizarre sensation , all things told .
Specifying the half life or mean life of a process is a way of quantifying how fast it is occurring , when the whole process would in principle take forever to complete .
Yes I know it was probably a young ass , not a horse , but an ass is a member of the horse family .
I guess he 's finding out that raising a son is a bit more difficult then running a major company .
[ The dressers ] were traveling hours on the bus [ to earn only ] four dollars a show was the rumor .
Such a judgment is an aesthetic judgment on the purposiveness of the object , which is not grounded on any available concept of the object , and does not furnish one .
Under the general principle that the local slope of a river is the result and measure of the resistance of its bed , it is evident that a narrow and deep stream should have less slope , because it has less frictional surface in proportion to capacity ; i.e. , less perimeter in proportion to area of cross section .
Similarly , in Rhodesia , where mines require a larger supply of labour than can be obtained from natives by ordinary economic motives , an increase of the hut-tax and a labour-tax are an integral part of the public policy .
If a judge believes a statute is a barrier to a business rather than a benefit to the market , the judge will probably be more reticent to enforce it .
DISCLAIMER : The hiring of a lawyer is an important decision that should not be based solely upon advertisements .
] Because a rule 's a rule ; if you break one you have to be willing to pay the price .
for the madness of a riot is a pathological inversion , but also therefore a reminder , of that indivisible sanity that binds people to each other independently of their governments .
So , how bad a condition was the bridge in ten years ago ?
Opening the lid to have a sip is a one-handed operation , so if you were to try and use it while doing something else , such as concentrating on the road , it would be safer than other mugs .
For example , we can guess that someone using a skate-board is a skate-boarder engaged in skate-boarding , and if we see the word unteachability we can guess from knowledge of other word families that it means ' state ( - ity ) of not ( un - ) being able to be ( - abil - ) taught ( teach ) ' .
The family link can be shown through definitions : one word provides material out of which the other 's definition is built ( a teacher is a ' a person who teaches ' ) .
As I 'm sure you know , a conch is a mollusc , a kind of large saltwater snail and its shell .
why dont you design a system were the second pair of wheels could be wound up making the caravan move like a single .
applicable taxes and other costs incurred from participating in a transaction are the responsibility of the buyer and seller .
A licence is a permission given by the copyright owner to another person ( known as the licensee ) .
Driving yourself around Thailand in a rental is a sensible idea , in spite of the cheap taxis and drivers that are ubiquitous .
Even an image of an angel is an angel ...
A biopsy is the final stage in confirming a diagnosis of multiple myeloma .
Biopsy A biopsy is a test that involves taking a small sample of tissue from the body so it can be examined .
In the British army , a bombardier is the equivalent in the artillery regiments of a corporal in other regiments : a non-commissioned officer ranking below sergeant and above lance-bombardier ( = lance-corporal ) .
A problem , lost contact ; what sort of a church was this ?
:-) However , a promise is a promise so here are my poorly written and inadequate thoughts about Lambert Cronk 's Touch The Earth .
This resonates with my belief in the fundamental importance of community - starting with the individual , in which even a cell is a community in itself , and broadening the concept through the Five Element theory , into relationships , family and our physical environment , right through to a global scale and beyond , past , present and future .
English intonation is not very good at making clear whether an utterance is a statement or a question .
The big advantage for those who are untidy or just in a rush are the series of separate compartments .
Nothing makes a woman feel more secure than scrubbing a floor is this argument , which I think sucks .
I Googled Asics , generically we call such shoes trainers in the U.K. and I believe a lazy-boy is a reclining chair .
You stated that such a ditch is a hazard in terms of soil erosion and polluting the river it flows into with sediment and cattle droppings .
Within half a mile is a MacDonald 's restaurant ( also on the Bath Road and to the East ) and the Heathrow Visitor centre .
A patent is a combined technical and legal document , and is granted after examination by the relevant Patent Office .
The proper interpretation of a statute is a matter for the courts , not Parliament .
my periods are so heavy i cant leave the house for three days and the pain is unbearable even if i take 2 500 paracetomol and 2 ibruprofin that only makes it less painfull .. i think the questions im asking myself are --- should i just carry on as normal and hope the bleeding goes or look into another way of stopping that and hope i dont get cancer as a hysterectomy is a major operation and also life changing --- what kind of HRT should i be looking at if i have a full hysterectomy .
Living in a small flat for a few years can get boring so buying a hamster is a good suggestion .
A prototype is a small scale mock-up of a product , or a test run of a service , created to explore its viability as part of research and development .
The history of administrative law in this country and how it has grown over the past 300 years shows that the seeking of a remedy was the point at issue .
Friend was making between a super-injunction and a hyper-injunction , because what is called a super-injunction is an injunction that requires a particular course of action to be taken , including not reporting that the injunction in place is proceeding .
high-speed , and without a doubt is the biggest options of 4 G. LTE theoretical obtain speeds of about 100 MB / s , equivalent to about 2000 times the dial-up .
It just looks like a pointless whinge about amateur radio , however the drongos being discussed having a licence means diddly squat , a plank is a plank is a plank .
The decision to impose a freeze is the central decision that interferes with a designated person 's rights .
Some you will 10 recognize 11 Mary Khahenzi told you about her identifying her 12 husband , Thomas , from the t-shirt ; Doreen Ruto 's husband , 13 Wilson , and she said he was a handsome man , a courageous man ; 14 Joyce Ng ' ang ' a 's passport photo ; Amos Karimi 's wife , who was 15 killed in the Ufundi Building 16 But the photo and a name is all you are going to know 17 for some .
BAUGH : Yes , sir 13 THE COURT : Do not accuse me of being a racist , 14 because there is no justification for that , and for you to say 15 that I reach any conclusion because a defendant is an Arab is 16 unspeakable 17 MR .
That is to say , you are not to 21 consider in Section II or thereafter on through Section VI any 22 of the counts that are specified above in Section I , Part B. 23 In other words , a gateway is a threshhold .
A parable is an earthly story with a heavenly meaning , and Jesus Christ who came as Messiah spoke in parables , as our Jewish scriptures foretold , ( Psalm 78:2 78:2 ) " I will open my mouth in parables .
" An excuse is worse and more terrible than a lie ; for an excuse is a lie guarded .
BACK BOUNCING KWIKFISH Backbouncing with a weight is the most productive way to fish Kwikfish in deep ( even roily ) salmon holes that lack the right current to fish your lure on a flat line or in combination with a Jet Diver .
15 A I am a security guard 16 Q For how long have you been a security guard ?
An opening is the opportunity to put 5 before you what it is that the party making the opening 6 statement believes that the evidence will show .
So a ring is a very dangerous thing .
A beach is a dynamic zone where the sand is in constant motion , sensitive to variations in waves , winds , tides , currents and human intervention .
The beginning of a year is a good time to take inventory of what you need for your juniors at club functions during the year whether it be a meeting , show , field trip etc. There are many items of interest for all ages in paper material for them that are free or can be purchased at minimal cost .
A building was the next thing , so we asked Helen Keeling School , and they agreed to let us use their multi-purpose room for $ 10 to pay for the janitor .
A resume is an important marketing tool .
] Or is is the article just saying " a nation-state is the only type of entity that could get physical access to enough people 's computers to really matter " ?
A fan was a bit upset that " he had to swear at us when we 've paid 60 pounds to go and watch him .
A visit is both fun and educational .
" A week is a long time in politics " .
The only one that made a difference was a place in the motor mount hole that interfered with the motor face , but that was easily cleaned up with about 10 minutes of file work .
... by the time the South Sea Bubble burst , the Jews as a body were the greatest financial power in the country .
The characteristic mark of a security is the ease with which it may be bought and sold .
If a portability is a bigger priority for you than power , the smaller , rugged Panasonic SC-NT 10 gets pretty loud for its size with no distortion or vibration , but ca n't deliver as much power as the BRV -1 .
The writing paper , pens and lead pencils were all of the simplest material , and the only instrument used by a doctor was the lancet .
The word has nothing to do with the Druids , but with Drude : in Southern German and Austrian popular belief a Drude is a female ghost who causes nightmares .
A profit is a profit , thats a win .
Another misconception is that a crest is the entire coat of arms .
When first I left home to go abroad a passport was an indifferent formality ; you could go without one , and did .
Such a period was the Paleocene-Eocene thermal maximum ( PETM ) , when the ocean " acidified " ( but was still alkaline ) because of a massive release of methane , which quickly oxidised to CO 2 .
However , categorizing all persons who are multiple as suffering from a disorder is an injustice .
The feature of university life which most inspired me in my first year as an undergraduate was the realization that the people who were now teaching me were active scientists who had directly contributed to the subject they were teaching through their research and that their research was stuff from which they still got a kick .
If a man was a poor soldier , his case was weakened .
[ A fireball is a bright meteor that moves slowly across the sky , leaving a glowing trail in its wake .
The woman who was locked in a hut is a good example for everyone .
A character is a function of the text , a " pseudo-object " in Gérard Genette 's words , wholly constituted by discourse .3 Putting one of Plato 's notoriously thorny passages at the center of her analysis , Allen would have profited from consulting a wider literature .
But to dream of reading or listening to a story is a sign of happy times to come .
A raccoon is an excellent tree climber and is not bothered by drops of 35 or 40 feet .
" Not having a market is the only thing worse than having a market , " says Csaba Csaki .
A transcript is a convenient record for the analysis of an interchange of moves within an episode involving two or more participants .
Just because a person is a politician , it does n't make him smart .
[ 29 ] Some would claim that the first transatlantic voyage of a steamship was the Savannah in 1819 .
A baronet is a commoner , the principle of the order being to give rank , precedence , and title without privilege .
" -0 " , now ... ah , I remember - a number as an option is the octal code of the end-of-line definition for the files we 're reading in .
Its presence in a film is a sure sign one is watching a turkey .
Next to her having a haircut was a 14 year old blonde teenager .
In a way , refusing to operate on , let 's say , a tree , he 's only saying " a tree is a tree " , when he had to burn it .
In a way , refusing to operate on , let 's > say , a tree , he 's only saying " a tree is a tree " , when he had to > burn it .
The use of predicateObjectList within a blankNodePropertyList is a common idiom for representing a series of properties of a node .
A performance is a presence in a film that is both projected upon and projective unto itself ; an object is presence that is purely projected upon .
However , unlike a corporation , which must pay its own taxes , an LLC is a pass-through tax entity : The profits and losses of the business pass through to its owners , who report them on their personal tax returns just as they would if they owned a partnership or sole proprietorship .
In the following , a spec-expression-list is a list of one or more spec-expressions separated by semicolons .
A spec-expression is any expression that has no side effects .
In the following , a collection-expression is an expression with type T [ ] , set or bag for some type T. A bool-expression is an expression that has type bool .
A cup is a container of a drink potion , and the contents of the cup are what is provided by one for another , and symbolize the imposing of one 's will upon another .
EP ( as he was known in the trade ) claimed that the Azande believe that if a man is a witch , then all his patrilineal descendents are witches .
However , the demographics of a democracy is a numbers game , where one person equals one vote , however qualified ( or unqualified ) that person .
He said buying his daughter a wheelchair was a very difficult experience .
More often than not when you mention a movie is a Hallmark movie people tend to scoff because of the lack of realism and general sugar coated niceness which often permeate them .
The overall heat dissipation is noticeably lower ; however , it is still too high and the lack of a fan is a major design defect of this product , making it unusable in a hot environment and that includes being exposed to direct sunlight at reasonable human-environment ambient temperatures .
As a number of commentators have pointed out , it is not possible to conclude from the statistics that marriage itself causes the positive outcomes associated with it and that therefore the stability of a society is a function of the support given to the institution of marriage .
A book is the last place I 'd want to START Maths with a child of three .
" a curiosity are the actual performances as whilst entertaining George Costigan as Bob is also incredibly cheesy .
" line - an example is any ground rent paid .
A proposal is a public document and can be viewed on request .
What is more of a deterrent is the perception that " high art " is only for the rich .
Data contained in messages and reports are structured to facilitate the extraction of selected data from the archive , the selection being based on location , time and meteorological element ( where an element is a single meteorological variable such as wind speed , cloud cover or relative humidity ) .
A certificate is a data structure that binds the identity of the certificate holder to a public key .
Technically speaking , a certificate is a standard form record that contains a description of its owner , including the public key .
The difference is that a theory attempts to explain why things happen , whereas a model is a pattern of events , which can be learnt and repeated .
) The Diaglotts interlinear translation of the Greek , word for word , makes the distinction between Jehovah as " GOD " and the Logos as " God " still more clear , reading as follows : " In a beginning was the Word , and the Word was with the God , and a god was the Word .
A tool is a workflow application that is invoked by the workflow management system .
A triangle is a symbol of it to them .
Hindu philosophy is that this tangible universe of which we are a part is a creation that is to dissolve and return to what is called its " seed state " .
In a nutshell , a matrix was a field that , instead of containing one type of data , contained an array of data .
How do you know if a person is an entrepreneur or not ?
Or , as Vrba puts it , " An exaptation is a character that is currently useful ( and subject to selection ) in a particular role , but that was not shaped by step-by-step selection for that role " ( Vrba 1989 , p 130 ) .
From tourist maps , to illustrated atlases , I think creating a map is a very personal thing .
This schema opens the door to the possibility of a semantic analysis in which the meaning of a sentence is the sum of the meanings of the kernel sentences from which it is derived , plus the semantic relations between kernels that are specified by the grammatical links between them .
The principle that umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu , or " a person is a person through her relations of care and love for others " does not imply that freedom of speech must be curtailed in the interests of social harmony .
One scant cup a day is all I ever drink , but it 's amazing how dependent I am on it .
[ 35 ] Since " civilization " is generally something about which we are unconscious , such a reorientation is a painful process , calling into question the host of assumptions we have about reality and how things are .
An apocalypticist is a person who believes the end is near and looks forward to it for the supposed release it will bring to him and his fellow believers .
I think that JAP 's point is that making people aware that there is a problem is an early stage in the process .
That in a nutshell is the thesis of Wolfgang Streeck 's new book , currently only available in German , but being translated for publication with Verso .
An arena is a big , specially aligned memory block .
There is no doubt that such a capacity is a distinctive element in the normal human cognitive endowment .
Like Bush saying Kanye calling him a racist was the worst thing that happened to him in his presidency .
After all , this discussion originally was n't about a play in which a character was an insensitive playwright writing a sexist character or play .
In spite of our culture 's conflicts and denials about it , an adolescent IS a sexual being , and I think that , in order to help the patient in therapy , we must not replicate the cultural denial of the reality and normality of his sexual feelings in such a situation .
This girl gets her feelings hurt and a cuddle is the only way she 'll calm down .
If a bunch of aliens came down to invade the world of Song and Ice and Fire , the difference between the races would all of a sudden be a lot less important ( and we 'd probably get a lot more differentiation between the " Oriental " others .
This was not the approach we chose , but , yeah , getting your foot in the door as an artist is all about taking risks .
How you have a baby is a big deal for many women and for some , there 's no more appealing idea than skipping the hospital and giving birth in the comfort of home .
An abstract is a concise single paragraph summary of completed work or work in progress .
Tushar @ Earn More and Save writes The Questions At The Centre Of The Mortgage Journey To Homeownership - Each Canadian family must ask questions that form the basis of the mortgage journey to ensure their investment in a home is a wise decision .
' I put it to you that such a phrase is a not inaccurate summary of the Buick division 's business acumen over the past few automobile seasons .
A specific is a statement about one thing , one person or one event .
Collaborating on a manuscript is a special kind of version control hell , especially if those writing are in disagreement about systems to use e.g. , LaTeX versus Microsoft Word ) .
But more and more these " works " include digital assets that are not publications , and the burden of collecting all of the digital scholarship produced by an institution is a near-insurmountable task for a small group of librarians ; there has to be either buy-in from researchers or mandates from the top .
A heterodimer is a protein that consists of two different gene products .
Data science as a method is an instrument .
Imbalances on the capital account mean that a country is a net seller of international assets ( if a capital account surplus ) or a net buyer of international assets ( if a capital account deficit ) .
" Being a parent is a monumental thing .
Could an iPhone be a useful field tool ?
Building a codex is a pain .
If you find yourself in an Australian city , just walk 20 meters in any direction and you will find yourself outside a pub , which will be guaranteed to be rough , as the roughness of a pub is a legal condition of its liquor license .
Whether I am walking around the control room while listening back or if I am in the vocal booth recording , a wireless control surface that makes no fan noise to be picked up by a mic is an asset .
A meter is a typical height for a 3 - year old child , or about the size of two cocker spaniels .
Such a conversation is a threat to Rhee 's view of the world - most directly because it challenges the formulaic mode of education she is foisting on all public school children - but also because a growing partnership between parents and teachers threatens the current misplaced effort to demonize teachers .
The quality of your brand extends beyond your products and services to a customer 's every interaction with your company .
An example is the time course of an infection : The infection with few viruses could be sufficient to trigger a sickness since the viruses replicate themselves ( self-enhancement ) .
Whether a set of facts establishes a contract is a question of law .
" A benefit is a legal right given to the promisor to which the promisor would not otherwise be entitled .
A man is a bundle of relations , a knot of roots , whose flower and fruitage is the world .
The job is a contract-with-intent-to-hire position , which is not exactly what I was looking for , but , at this point , a paycheck is a paycheck , and it gets my foot into both an industry and a job title I think I would be interested in , so go me .
Some mints spread so fast and aggressively , that keeping them in a container is the only way to prevent them from taking over your garden .
A helicopter is a type of craft in which its lift and thrust are supplied by rotors This allows the helicopter to take off and land vertically , to hover , and to fly forward , backward , and laterally .
Transporting a car is a very common service that is offered worldwide and can essentially transport any type of vehicle from any given point to another .
Shipping a vehicle is a big ordeal depending on the make and model of the car and the requirements you need to safely transport your car from one place to another .
An injunction is a legal ruling that stops something , typically , from happening .
We 're virtual , in the sense that our primary presence as a company is the three-dimensional online digital world of Second Life where we will conduct our business , our presentations , our brainstorms and our pitches .
One of the biggest advantages of rhyme for a poet is the way it brings randomness ( via the arbitrary similarity of sounds ) into the writing process .
Gambling addicts and Gambling professionals are similar in most of their betting behavior ; however , what differentiates a professional from an addict is the respect factor !
I am sorry it came out so gummy for you , the only other factors I could see making a difference are the perhaps brand of coconut milk or tofu .
Lightly grease a 2½ pint pudding basin ( a basin is a ceramic bowl ) .
A tamdyr is a traditional Central Asian dome-shaped clay oven placed outside the home ; in the cities , several apartment buildings may share a single tamdyr .
A dastan is a combination epic tale and lyric poem which formed the basis of oral tradition .
Criminology as a discipline is the study of crime and the criminal element , its causes , and the suppression and prevention of it .
A president is a head of state - a leader , not a manager .
A break is a stress point where the sheep had some sort of problem ( feeding , health , other stress -- I think lambing can cause a break too ) , and it weakens the wool which can cause breakage and general poor quality right down the line , from fiber prep to spinning to knitting to the final garment .
A bathroom is a cheaper investment because its square footage is the smallest .
The house is far from the city , but she knows by now that the kind of city that grows from a prison is the kind that does n't like neighbors moving in .
Poverty and the difficulty of finding a job are the core motivation for several characters , a source of constraints .
Put as simply as possible , an enzyme is a class of protein that catalyses ( speeds up ) chemical reactions within the body .
However , the ability to edit a PDF is some mitigation if you only want to tweak a few aspects of a document .
As an industry , we need to embrace the idea that a pension is a consumer product .
It is said that ' a dog is a man 's best friend ' but judging by the relationship between Jeanette Tayler , and her clients - it 's a woman 's best friend too !
Such a programme is a natural and intrinsic element of a National Food and Farming Strategy which has Food Sovereignty -- the ability of the country to feed itself independently -- as a core principle .
A laconium is a tiled room where the floors , walls and benches are usually all heated to a mild temperature of around 60 -65 degrees Fahrenheit .
A sauna is a traditional dry air room that heats to 85 -95 degrees Fahrenheit .
The style of a man is a direct result of his passion for life " .
Creating a pond is an excellent way to increase wildlife interest from dragonflies to newts .
Who owns such an organisation is a separate issue , but if there are financial benefits from it being owned by the state , then this route should be taken .
Being out of power for twelve years , we now understand a majority is that important ; to constitute one you need to consider different points of view to maintain the majority .
Find out what we are responsible for and whether a footpath is a public right of way .
Ultimately buying a mooncup is a ' risk ' because if it does n't work for you then you have lost £ 20 .
A philosopher is a wretched animal , an insipid sheep , who is in the habit of stuffing his mind with other men 's teaching .
Training to be a bricklayer is a good career move at any time if you want to get into the skilled trade industry .
Activist Leehee Rothschild says their willingness to detain people who have n't done anything wrong or committed a crime is a hysterical reaction .
At present there is no requirement for those who train first aid to have a " formal " training qualification-all you need as a minimum is a " First Aid Instructors " qualification .
In addition ( or if you ca n't do this for whatever reason ) , fit a hippo to your toilet cistern ( a hippo is a plastic box that rests inside the cistern to reduce the amount of water released per flush - many water providers will give you one free of charge ) .
With this in mind , it is not necessary to know exactly what is appearing on the credit report before we begin work An arm is a mortgage with an interest rate that adjusts periodically to reflect changes in market conditions .
A Transistor is an semiconductor which is a fundamental component in almost all electronic devices .
A trigenerator is a very efficient way of providing on-site power , heating and cooling .
It still remains that the best long-term bet for a mortgage is the 15 - year fixed rate mortgage .
But seeing as I had my queen , a knight , a castle , a bishop and some pawns - half an hour is a pretty long time !
A staycation is a great chance to relax and chill out and you will want to find just the right sort of clothing that makes you feel relaxed but stylish at the same time .
But if you get to board the train when the platform is open then having a seat is no problem .
A talisman is any physical object that stores and radiates magical energy to create change or provide protection .
One of the most powerful amulets to be worn as a pendant is the Sator-Rotas Square .
The foot of a rabbit is a good luck charm around the world .
For Europeans , the wearing of red to a wedding is an ill omen , but green is to be avoided at all costs ; it is the colour of the fairies and they are liable to come and steal away anyone found wearing it .
A collet is the part of a ring which holds the stone .
" Outside of a dog a book is a man 's friend , inside of a dog it 's too dark to read .
By that , it would appear that he would agree with both the Christian Scientists of today , who state that a miracle is a divinely natural occurrence that must be learned humanly , and those who would define a miracle as an extraordinary event manifesting divine intervention into human affairs .
An occupation is a way of saying that we collectively can control our lives .
The way in which Exim decides whether a host is the local host is described in section 13.8 .
For the orthodox there can always be a revolution ; for a revolution is a restoration .
This is because a person is a self-conscious being - self-conscious beings see themselves as distinct entities with a future and have preferences for the future ( Singer 1993 : 90 , 95 ) .
According to Regan whether or not an individual is a moral patient and is hence entitled to moral consideration is dependant on whether or not they possess inherent value ( Benton 1996 : 24 ) .
" An idea is a greater monument than a cathedral .
Even when as a symptom it cannot be immediately assigned to a clearly defined pattern the initial premise of Chinese medicine was that symptoms were merely the alarm bells of internal disharmony , and that balancing the system as a whole was a legitimate strategy for reducing or removing them .
As far as I 'm concerned , the job of a housewife Is an executive position .
If a guy is an * * * then it does n't alter the fact that he is an * * * .
THE heroic is a fact , even when it is a fact of coincidence or of miracle ; and a fact is a thing which can be admitted without being explained .
3.6.56 The designation of a DPA is an enhancement policy .
What was not a mystery was the connection between thee Goddess Hecate and dogs .
A debate is a pointless points scoring exercise anyway .
In general the output of a transducer is a very small voltage which can be affected by noise and interference in the environment .
A capacitor is a pair of parallel plates with some insulating dielectric material between them , which can be used to store an electrostatic charge .
A multiplexer is an electrical switch , which under program control can connect the A to D converter to a particular input signal line .
A lie is a lie is a lie , no matter who tells it or how often it is told .
If a user is a paid customer subscription dues will be refunded for the current month .
Preparing for a concerto is the most work .
Revisiting stories of the past gives a reminder that an approach we see as possible in today 's world is more than a proposition-it 's a proven path to breaking the isolation that enables war .
Bridgman and Packer move through walls , showing that a doorway is both mirror and door , reflection and portal .
Moreover , a nominee is a party authorized to act on behalf of another party .
A nominee is a " person designated to act in place of another , usu[ally] in a very limited way , " or a " party who holds bare legal title for the benefit of others or who receives and distributes funds for the benefit of others .
A family is a nation in miniature .
An astute observer of church growth once noted that planting a church is a lot like life as a pioneer in the American West .
It is a myth that a vessel is the sovereign territory of their flag state when in foreign waters .
A number is a number .
I would posit that a noose is a noose - whether you put a corporate or Public brand on it .
Like anything else , an o-face is a tool in an artist 's tool box , and it 's all in how it 's used that decides whether or not it works ( and is therefore appropriate ) .
Building a business is no mean feat .
A gymnasium is a cherished feature of most present rural Alaskan schools , and the attendant shower / locker rooms is especially important in communities whose public facilities do n't include this feature .
Which is why I always ask people to use s in their feeds , so we can identify items , so we can know when an item is an updated version of a previous item .
I do n't give a flying fuck if someone is a Doctor of Medicine or a Doctor of Education , a doctor is a doctor is a doctor .
A glance was all he had time for -- another crewman appeared towards the stern .
My daughter is here with me today - ( applause ) - and being the mother of a daughter is a great inspiration and motivation for caring about the girls of the world .
A handle is a kind of thing .
A nose is a kind of thing .
A colour is a kind of value .
A chest is a kind of container .
A lid is a kind of supporter .
In a world where an office is a space to think the space serves me well .
A backtrace is an array of strings , in the same format as the return value of the method caller .
( Please , kill me know . ) Max notes that being a lawyer is a problem " only if you like seeing criminals put behind bars .
The procedure can be used when a person is a consumer having bought the goods or service for private use from someone selling them in the course of their business .
A cornerstone is the Festival Orchestra , which includes distinguished Jacobs faculty , guests from major symphony orchestras around the United States and many of the most talented students from the school .
However , the connecting train is late , and while waiting Samuel witnesses a murder is the depot 's washroom .
( A trustee is a prisoner who has earned greater than normal freedoms , so that he can perform jobs like taking books around to other prisoners or janitorial work .
Place reframes Kim Rosenfeld 's blurb ( itself the product of appropriation ) for Statement of Facts so that instead of saying Place 's work opposes Judge Gilbert Alston 's infamous statement that " A whore is a whore is a whore , " Rosenfeld 's blurb ends up saying that Place 's work affirms Judge Alston 's view .
An example is the case of Nora ( Dolan , 1991 , p 157 ) who entered therapy because of panic attacks , choking feelings , and intense fear .
Other important factors international students look into when deciding on a university are the college fee and scholarships .
Another major factor that international students consider while choosing a university is the flexibility of classes .
The body-self is a site where subjecthood is negotiated and contracted ; where disciplinary boundaries and biological essences are tested ; where the body as a territory is both mapped and deterritorialized , as in the many well-known cases outlined by Deleuze and Guattari .
Being able to sew a button is a long way from verifying one 's competence , but men doing anything over and above sitting in front of the Tele and watching soccer is an impressive enough difference in England .
Adopted view of " biogenetic law , " which antedated him , that development of an individual is a recapitulation * of the hist .
It 's as if public humiliation of such a woman were the most perfect way of all to put our own house in order .
A paradigm is a framework of rules and theories that follow a distinct pattern ( the word paradigm actually comes from the Greek word for pattern ) .
The top three attributes for a counselor are the ones we all learned and can cite , but do we really live them ?
One of the most useful skills or attributes to have as a counselor is the ability to understand our own and our client 's worldview and priorities within a cultural context e.g. , impact of race , ethnicity , gender , socioeconomic status , etc. ) since our cultural context influences the lens we use to view the world .
The ability to put aside what you 've been " taught " and go with your gut feelings when working with a client is an invaluable counseling skill .
Being a counselor is a way of life and testimony to my belief in the power of the therapeutic relationship , which needs to be continually nurtured .
The most valuable comments in a review are those that help the authors understand the shortcomings of their work and how they might improve it .
The " phase " of a substance is the particular physical state it is in .
" The only person that can stay an execution is the governor , " Roberts said .
You are right that one thing that would make a difference is the precessional motion of the Earth which has a period of 26,000 years .
In academia , a thesis is a document that presents the author 's research and findings and is submitted in support of candidature for a degree or professional qualification .
Reporting a crime is the only way to keep the same person from hurting or stealing from someone else .
( Human Powered Vehicle ) One of the most powerful ways to teach about objects and their properties is to imagine that each object in a system is a person .
A trip was a trip , no matter how many hours it took , and to ask to tie up on the road for rest would have been considered as showing a lack of stamina .
We 've pointed out many times that using war spending as an offset is a gimmick since the caps are simply meant to reflect plans already in place .
One gamekeeper who spent two days with us , kept telling us that various hillocks in an area were the result of ' volcanic action ' , the problem with this was that there are not and never have been any volcanoes in the area !
Apparently , the State Department does n't think that a birth certificate , church records , school records , and voter rolls are enough to prove that a person is a citizen of the United States anymore .
In Anglo-Saxon culture , a hero was a warrior , who was successful on the battlefield and illustrated great loyalty to his lord and tribe .
A mind is a terrible thing to waste .
An axiom is a rule or statement .
As for " Teaching all theories " : A theory is a set of models that has an overwhelmingly large amount of evidence to support it and that has n't been sufficiently falsified .
Essentially the decision to use CSLA on a project is an irrevocable one .
One of the most important topics to consider when converting a repository is the distinction between binary and text files .
" - Ronald Reagan , U.S. President , November 3 , 1988 , Proclamation 5896 National Jukebox Week 1988 A jukebox is a coin operated phonograph , housed in a decorative cabinet , and equipped with push button numbers and letters by which a customer selects songs from an array of either 45 or 78 rpm vinyl records .
Buying a boat is a little like buying a spacecraft would be .
Coach Jason Garrett may spend the week preaching a " win is a win is a win in the National Football League " but the local and national media and next Sunday 's studio shows will go deep into dissecting why the Cowboys struggled so mightily against a now 1 -7 team .
Inciting such an argument was a dangerous move for the detective , who risked losing the ground that he had earlier gained .
For now those are the only instructions for removing unnecessary characters that you have to follow ( oh yes , a newline is a character , too ) .
In the Windows operating system used on the testing computer , a newline is a sequence of characters with codes # 13 # 10 .
A brand is a businesses most valuable asset .
Preventing a problem is a far better solution that dealing with wildlife after a conflict .
For instance , it is simple to discern when a feature is a name or a Social Security Number , provided that the fields are appropriately labeled .
Software as a service is another growth market as corporates look to rent software instead of buying it .
( A half-tester is a half-canopied four-poster bed .
Having a child is the greatest gift .
You bet , the experience of taking part in theatre without a theatre is an opportunity not to be missed .
A router is a router , so I would not go buying ' an xbox compatible ' router before you check if your homehub works ok .
Giving a child a camera is a powerful way for them to show what is really important to them .
While a buy is a stronger signal than a sell ( a director will generally buy when he believes the shares will rise ) , directors often have other agendas such as a desire to display confidence in the company 's prospects - particularly newly-appointed chief executives and directors trying to reassure investors after the share price has fallen sharply .
We have various friends and contacts in the areas they plan heading to awho are all happy to act as emergency contacts , which as a parent is a considerable comfort .
An example is the following .
A 20 % climb for well over a kilometre was a sting in the tail .
Being a mummy is the best job in the world !!
" A knave 's a knave , to me , in ev ' ry state : Alike my scorn , if he succeed or fail , Sporus at court , or Japhet in a jail , A hireling scribbler , or a hireling peer , Knight of the post corrupt , or of the shire ; If on a pillory , or near a throne , He gain his prince 's ear , or lose his own .
In a clear reference to how differently the Hoops are run from Rangers , Reid said : " The people who decide if we are going to sell a player are the manager and the board , not some anonymous director of a bank somewhere .
It 's a scumbag who cheats on their partner whilst claiming nothing 's going on , and just as a big a scumbag is the person they cheat with .
As with most crimes the punishment fit for an accomplice is a lesser one than the actual perputrator .
Actually the sentence for an accessory is the same as the offender .
Does anyone know if the side skirts on an estate are the same as the 5 door hatch , i have bought a XP but the seller has informed me that the side skirts may be for the estate but hes unsure ... are they the same ?
The drawing that they showed was 3 people standing by a fence and in the distance up a hill was a mansion ..
Let 's face it , a church is a church !
A cookie is a small text file that is stored on your device for record-keeping purposes .
The following rule specifies that a grave accent followed by a b is a contraction , and sorts as if it were an e .
Wobbly feet and a beer is all I got yet on loud proclaiming I insisted : " Believe me guys !
To define what an unjournal is , take the first 2 sentences in the wikipedia entry on unconferences and substitute a few words : " An unjournal is a facilitated , participant-driven journal centered on a theme or purpose .
It means a person is an expert in performing everyday tasks relating to his / her profession .
Second , that being a Muslim is the most salient identity for Muslim Americans when it comes to their political attitudes and behaviors , that it trumps their social class position , national origin , racial / ethnic group membership , or gender-or worse , that it trumps their commitment to a secular democracy .
A lot of coders are used to the notion that a character is an 8 - bit value , and there 's a certain kind of trust in knowing that the 8 - bit values you see in memory match the 8 - bit values on disk .
I think what I meant was more , if a book is a fully formed romance , not an excuse for formulaic sex scenes , then it does n't really matter whether I find the sex scenes hot , because the book is giving me other kinds of emotional and intellectual pleasure .
I was told that a homebirth is an automatic ' red flag .
A deadline 's a deadline ( for those of us who are n't in charge of setting deadlines ) .
Get a dog - Taking it for a walk 3 - 4 times a day is a great way to be active .
Never order takeout during your lunch break - Walking to a restaurant is a great way to stretch your legs after sitting for hours at your desk .
Join an amateur drama club - Rehearsing for a play is a great way to build confidence and it 's certainly better than spending more time in a chair .
For advertisers , the programming is the medium , not the message ; a programme is a conduit to the audience of a broadcaster , not something they should generally been seen as supporting .
Here a discussion is the key .
Also , if you 're into practicing Yoga , a studio is a great place to delve into meditation while exercising the mind and body , if you are willing to share the experience with your fellow yogis .
Among those facing a complaint is the Rev .
What is the importance of an ox or a sheep being a he or she ?
Buying a pool is a big decision-one most folks make only once in their lives .
( By definition , a taxonomy is a hierarchical organization of categories .
trying to brake late into a corner is a good way to crash .
A charter is a blend of public and private funding .
" A stock is a unique entity ; its price is affected by factors different from those that determine the value of an individual company .
A stump is the lower trunk of a tree , a remnant produced by the death and collapse of the tree .
The tail of an animal is a kind of stump limb , although it is not a generative organ .
The defining characteristic is not origin , but constitution : a man is a being that thinks , feels , and behaves in the human way , whatever his origins , although there is a wide latitude in what psychology is distinctively human .
The landfill where a work is a fly magnet and breeding ground .
A closure is a function that returns a function .
An ideal is an individual thing determined or determinable by an idea of reason .
That is , for every predicate F , an individual is either F or non-F .
Our best guess at such a form is the one registered .
The 1915 film Birth of a Nation was an allegorical invocation of white nationalism , for example .
A sacrament is something instituted by God , such as Baptism , Marriage , Confession , the Eucharist , ( I know I 'm missing some ) Holy Orders , while a sacramental is an object used in sacramental rites like a chalice ( but preferably not a cup ! ) or like blessed palms or holy water ?
If I recall what was drilled into us at East Troy : " A sacrament is an outward sign instituted by Christ to give grace .
" And I surmise that a sacramental is an object which is directly involved in a sacrament but is n't what conferrs the grace ( i.e. holy water , holy oil , etc. ) .
Electing a mayor is a somewhat different situation to a general election ; some of the problems that general election reform would attempt to fix simply do n't apply .
So China , has to a degree been a constructive player on this matter .
An initiation is a formal process for bringing about specific long-term changes in human consciousness .
The combined cost of owning and operating a car is another lesson to share with teens .
The sudden action at a distance is a form of extreme mobility which is reflected in the mobility that humans and the tall being possess in compensation for their fragility .
A path is a list of and , which we call a direction .
This strategy of computing an answer is a simple form of BACKTRACKING .
A homology is a " [c]haracter shared by a set of species and present in their common ancestor " ( Ridley , 1996 , p 665 ) , there is therefore reason to believe that the ( in the case of psychology ) neurological structure and genetics are relatively similar .
An analogy is a " [c]haracter shared by a set of species but not present in their common ancestor " ( Ridley , 1996 , p 665 ) , and there is no reason to believe that the neurological structure or genetics need be similar .
That visit to a therapist is an opportunity to have someone help you learn to get in touch with how you really feel , but then you 've got to allow that teaching to permeate your daily life .
Structure : " A structure is a self-stabilizing energy-event complex .
A vector is a partial generalization , being either metaphysically theoretical or physically realized , and in either sense an abstraction of a special-case , as are numbers both abstract ( empty sets ) or special-case ( filled sets ) .
Star : " A star is an exquisitely concentrated coordination of events that your optical tuning facilities are unable to resolve differentially into separately identifiable events .
Being blue and small and having a hat is a default , the way each Smurf breaks from that pattern makes them special but also reduces them to that defining factor .
A dictatorship is a form of government .
Any exercise you 're doing now will be a great benefit for your holiday - launching into 6 hours of intense activity having been dormant for a while is a recipe for fatigue and soreness - not the best way to enjoy your week !
The earpiece volume whilst taking a call is a little too loud which I feel is cured by turning the volume down ?
They only way you can use it as more than a phone is the internet - but it wo n't display my hotmail emails properly , you ca n't access links , no way to copy and past links to get to websites and does not support bbc iplayer .
" They say a week is a long time in politics , so a month in HR must be a lifetime .
In the fast-paced world of fashion , matching a look with a label is an exact science .
So what you want on a bike is a grease that has a high viscosity base oil ( and / or a good dose of EP additives ) in a binder with excellent sealing and water resisting properties that is also highly resistant to channelling ( getting pushed aside and not flowing back ) .
trying to text in a hurry is a nightmare .
Such a child is a citizen as a consequence of statute .94 Whatever the term " natural born " means , it no doubt does not include a person who is " naturalized .
I do n't see having a principal being a room mate with a student to be endearing for obvious reasons .
In later work , Harman looks downstream of intention , rather than upstream : an intention is a belief about what one is doing or what one is going to do that has the power to guide and motivate action through practical thought ( Harman 1986 , pp 375 -6 ; Setiya 2007 a , pp 48 -53 ) .
If you decide , after careful consideration , that forming a partnership is the best way to realize your business and personal goals , the rest of this book will help you draft a partnership agreement that will serve your business well for years to come .
A partnership is a business owned by two or more people .
A corporation is a legal entity separate from its owners , who are its shareholders .
Essentially , the LLC articles of organization that you must create and file to convert a partnership are the same as those required to create an LLC from scratch .
" The most common example of a security is a corporate stock or bond .
" An office is a public station , or employment , conferred by the appointment of government .
A hyperbole is a statement that is excessive .
I do n't blame him ; the censors are a bunch of losers if they think Milo in a dress is an abomination .
Oscar Makes An Impression was the typical English episode .
Q : Down at the bottom of a hill is a run-off pond with some wild growth that will soon be cut back and mostly removed .
A MP 3 can be a substitute for a CD , but we 're not at the place where a pdf is a substitute for a hard book .
A name is a spoken sound significant by convention ...
Players engaged in an infinitely repeated game constantly update probability distributions defined over the set of possible strategies played by their opponents , where a strategy is a function from the set of possible histories to the set of possible actions .
On her view , a convention is a pattern of behavior reproduced within a population due largely to weight of precedent .
In the physical world , a sensor is a converter that measures a physical quantity and converts it into a signal that can be read by an observer or by an instrument-today , mostly electronic .
You know , the same way that a clown and a clown carrying an umbrella are the same thing .
Finding a balance is a difficult task .
A mimicretin is a computer that plays stupid in order , once and for all , to be left in peace .
A probot is a robot on probation , while a servo is one still serving time .
A grammus is an antiquated frammus , a gidget - a cross between a gadget and a widget , usually flighty .
A bananalog is an analog banana plug . ...
It was a shock-it 's a shock anyway-when paragraphs hover into view when you 're making films .
It also studies other common bacteria and tries to understand natural disease outbreaks to help better identify when an outbreak is an act of bioterrorism .
An example of a regulation is a limit on how many newspapers can be owned by a particular company ( this would be passed by the FCC ) .
Someone once said that what makes a Classic is the quality of its genericness or applicability to other ages , other cultures , in short its Universality .
A t-test is a way of comparing the averages of your two datasets , which takes into account the number of samples you have and the variability between samples .
Oh and congratulations to the pregnant person with the original xmas thought , I did n't mean to sound so negative having a baby is a wonderful experience - just hard work with it.I cant imagine my life without the kids at all .
often a nightclub is a bad place to meet women they 're usually just out for a laugh with their mates and get a bit too full on .
Dogs love ' em ... suppose gettin ' a dog is a bit drastic though and will probably cause a lot more grief than the occasional wood louse meandering across the endless plain that is your carpet .
Originally posted by msbehavin Dogs love ' em ... suppose gettin ' a dog is a bit drastic though and will probably cause a lot more grief than the occasional wood louse meandering across the endless plain that is your carpet .
Someone once said to me that a rut is a grave with the ends knocked out .
The more integrated a society is the less tensions there are within that society .
Originally posted by owdlad I thought flittering in a turkey was a sexual offence :confused: it is on the mainland but has been strangely tollerated between consenting swans .
Nicholas Serota : It would be a tragedy were a decade 's advances to be squandered by a cut in cultural funding .
Like Cyclone said , an advertisment or a price tag in a shop is an " invitation to treat " .
An example is the NHS computer , 200 times over budget , where 1.01 times over budget would be the measure of catestrophic failure in the private sector .
Some children aged ten might not understand that pouring paint into a toddler 's eyes , torturing and beating him to death and then leaving him to be cut in half by a train is a very naughty thing to do indeed .
Is there any way to tell if a queen is a drone layer by looking at her ?
The death of a pope is the signal for cardinals from around the world to pack their bags and head for Rome to elect his successor .
Bringing the PC gaming experience to a console is no easy task , but Penguin United 's Eagle Eye Converter succeeds in providing gamers the precision of a keyboard and mouse combo on the PS 3 - and it does so without lag .
Just stating the obvious - blacking out a room is a lot easier at night .
A tiller is a lever attached to the rudder stock of a boat which provides the leverage for the captain , or this case the lighter man , to turn the rudder .
F -16 Fighting Falcons -- and of them , only a handful are the latest block -52 fighters .
Between the tither who " fasted twice a week and give tithes of all that I possess " and the publican , a sinner-it was the sinner who " went to his house justified " and not the tither .
We 're in a period now where people are documenting their experiences more than ever before , but not everyone who has a camera is a photographer .
It 's also odd to me that these Black ministers and other civic leaders - who are being funded by White organizations - keep declaring that Black women are either callous about their unborn children , or that Black women 's right to an abortion is a White racist conspiracy determined to annihilate the race .
Having a child is no great motivator for the male to take responsibility either .
If you believe that a demon is a servitor summoned as a manifestation of your desire then a simple bargain will suffice ( I 'll give you energy , you get what I want , I 'll give you a nice place to live ) .
So at least in the type of magick developed by Spare , Carroll , and Phil Hine , a servitor is a part of the magician 's psyche , or a part of the Deep Mind that the magician evokes to perform a task .
After all , if the heterosexual couple does not use protection and a child is the issue of the ritual , the result might be an actual monstrous child , rather than a servitor .
A pinata is a large paper-mache object that is shaped like something appealing and covered with colorful paper .
Using a tripod is an under-rated way of getting better photos in all kinds of travel situations , and you do n't need to break the bank or use half your luggage allowance to carry one .
To tie a shoelace into a knot is a relatively simple affair .
Tying a knot in a field is a different story , because the whole of space must be filled in a way that matches the knot being tied at the core .
A drop falling from a faucet is a common example of a liquid fissioning into two or more pieces .
I generally believe in the best about people , but I would suggest that there are just a few people we choose to trust , and what draws us to a product is the " shill effect " : If no one is sitting in the cafe , I 'm less likely to go in .
Tranparency and openness on a topic is an investment of the time and brainpower you devote to that topic , in this modern age .
A standard is a " living agreement , " in other words they take time to grow , develop , and mature , and they change over time .
A heatmap is an easy way to understand what users want , care about and do on your site by visually representing their clicks - which are the strongest indicators of visitor motivation and desire .
Last I knew a person was a criminal because they had committed a crime .
For most runners , a marathon is the summit .
If a conversation is a negotiation it means one of the parties wants something from the other person which may or may not be true .
I think too many people think a negotiation is some long drag out fight .
" A question is all it takes .
To be able to love more each day in a marriage is a blessed marriage ~ God is within them .
That an association is an entity for purposes of KORA , and that the entity receives public funds is not decisive of the issue presented , however .
When you are a broke student , you feel $ 40,000 a year is a fortune .
The woman had watched Rachel Ray , who said adding the rinds from cheeses to a broth is a great way to enhance a soup .
I enjoy my work / life balance at the moment and I feel that purchasing a house is a long-term move that I am not sure I am 100 % behind at the moment .
Walking barefoot in my grass and planting a garden is the two biggest reasons why I love a house .
I agree , that aspect to a house is a very nice one , and probably the one big thing I miss from being in a house .
Caring for an infant is both rewarding and demanding , but with a little bit of help and a lot of love , together we can make it a smooth transition .
A carryon is a particular size bag .
a lie is a lie and people need to with the fact policeman lie and at times can be some of the best liars out there .
Please explain how a minaret is a prerequisite to worship .
The 12 steps insist that a behavior is a disease .
Helping a hoarder is a delicate process that has less to do with the hoarder 's stuff-no matter how much stuff there is-and more to do with recognizing the hoarder 's unique challenges with care and compassion .
Also , being able to manage time as a team is a valuable lesson .
Thankfully , he tracked down his nurturing father , and Matt has figured out that a mind is a terrible thing to waste .
Benefit-Risk Profile The current interpretation of benefit-risk profile for a drug is a reflection of the overall balance of the product 's potential benefits with its identified risks as revealed through the safety and efficacy evidence , and through consideration of how that evidence contextualizes with normal conditions of use on market .
A midwife is a person who helps mothers at childbirth .
" If a guy 's a fastball hitter , I 'm not going to put him up there against a guy throwing curveballs , because I 'd be setting him up to fail , " the Chicago Cub 's Dusty Baker said .
Another standard feature on viewers with a stand is the hinge mount .
A destination is the URL , file , email address , page text anchor , or shared destination to which a hyperlink jumps .
A destination is the URL , file , email address , page , text anchor , or shared destination to which a hyperlink jumps .
A movie , a song , and a book are all broadcast mediums and I would n't call those " shouting .
Lynne Sachs 's Investigation of a Flame is an intimate and experimental documentary portrait of nine suburban protesters who walked into a Cantonsville , Maryland , draft board office on May 17 , 1968 , grabbed hundreds of selective service records , and burned them with homemade napalm .
It has become increasingly obvious that the people who refer to me as a bitch are the same people who have no self-esteem , self-confidence , or self-worth ; they are miserable with themselves and their lives , but yet they have the audacity to make a futile attempt to insult me because I am happy and content with mine !
A killfile is a list of people whose posts wo n't be displayed by the newsreader software ; the posters might as well not exist .
Now , a mof is a muff in English .
[ Herpity ] included an exhaust fan for the upper chamber but it turns out a grating is all he needs to keep the temperature at an acceptable level .
A modem is another piece of hardware needed that will provide the telephone line communication .
A ligament is a band of thick tissue that connects bone to bone , creating a joint which it helps to stabilize .
If so , then I do n't see the 3 D effect on a smartphone being a big draw .
The Sun , etc. , are the external manifestations or Vestures of this Soul , as a Man is the Garment of an actual Spermatozoon , the Tree sprung of that Seed , with power to multiply and to perpetuate that particular Nature , though without necessary consciousness of what is happening .
A satyr is a party that talks sarcastic .
A path is the line that results from drawing in Illustrator .
He 'd lost assets in the field - deliberately sacrificed a fair few along the way , all in the interests of the many - but a child was a step too far , one he had never had to face before .
Many years ago , his desk had been stacked with blue files just like this , plastered in Registry stamps and scrawled initials that tracked a file 's every single move around the building .
An interview was the best you could come up with ??
The idea that same-sex desire was congenital in a minority was a concept initially adopted with most enthusiasm by middle class men-unlike the views adopted earlier in the century , it provided a way for them to explain their desires which was not associated with moral weakness , foreigners or the lower classes .
Anyway my question is about uni ( and from reading these posts it confirms that going for a degree is a good idea ) but considering the amount of time that will be spent at uni earning the qualification - 3 / 4 ish years , and the fact the max age for officers is 25 it leaves it quite late to apply does n't it ?
What I can state are the guidelines which indicate that a prescription for asthma treatment in the four years prior to submitting an application are a bar to entry .
Spreading digital literacy within an organisation is the best long-term strategy for managing the Web shadow of an organisation .
I never realised that the creation of a Baroness was a reward for leaving industrial areas barren !
" Their reviews are well thought out with examples to support their ultimate opinions , yay or nay , and they do n't talk down to the reader , as if to suggest their opinion on such and such an album is the only one worth having and disagreeing with said opinion is the reader / listener 's fault , not theirs .
We made our way to the windjammer , it was busy , finding a table was no bother , as always the food selection was superb .
" It 's ok " he said " I 'll stay with them " and then to himself , " After all a promise is a promise " As Montsie turned to leave Bodie called after her " Any Swiss roll on that plate ?
An impairment is a problem in body function or structure ; an activity limitation is a difficulty encountered by an individual in executing a task or action ; while a participation restriction is a problem experienced by an individual in involvement in life situations .
Only on one evening a week are the residents allowed to invite their boyfriends into the lounge-and only then for nice quiet pencil-and-paper games .
One union leader proclaimed that driving a streetcar was a white man 's job and that black workers belonged " on the roadway " .
A craft is the thing itself .
I wrote , " A craft is the thing itself .
While an equivalence is an equality of value ( say , for instance , the illustration of a content ) , a complementarity is held to supply a complement , to complete or to make complete .
Your use of VISA as an example is a good one .
NW : In Less Than One you deny the hegemony of the " linear process " , yet immediately follow this with a ( linear ) paradigm -- " A school is a factory is a poem is a prison is academia is boredom , with flashes of panic .
A poem without a voice is an impossibility ( obviously a voice can be unobtrusive , boring or inconsequential , but that is beside the point ) .
The costs pressure on an opponent is the big advantage of Part 36 and the Part 36 regime is more flexible than the pre-CPR , defendant 's only , payment into court .
Unfortunately , a hint was all we received about the overall Dell cloud storage plans .
A helicopter is an aircraft that is lifted and propelled by one or more horizontal rotors because Wikipedia said so .
A wag is a wag but the odd big kick is not that likely to be generated from the 3 G unit surely unless it 's actually faulty ?
A wag is a wag but the odd big kick is not that likely to be generated from the 3 G unit surely ?
The catalogue for the V & A show is a charming abbreviation but gives insight into the formation of Anthology .
This is pretty damned critical and the work around is all-be it not to bad , but not workable on a big IIS farm , a patch is the best solution .
A division is a group of 3 to 7 units with a general in command .
A keffieh is a head covering traditionally worn by men , but Hatoum embroidered her piece with a woman 's hair .
Certainly the actual development of a website is the most significant aspect of any such project , however the overall success of the project will also depend on various other factors , which can sometimes be overlooked .
This may be because it cuts across the long-cherished Aristotelian notion of organic unity , where each component of a work is a necessary part of a whole .
What often drives a stalker is the desire to assert a relationship with the victim .
If they feel a case is an emergency they will arrange an ambulance for the patient .
Getting yourself , your banners and your climbing / safety gear 80 metres up a crane is a logistical challenge ; there 's not much room for luxuries .
Whether the facts in each specific case would support such a defence is another matter entirely .
Hyperbole and a Half is a Blogger blog that was created by Allie Brosh , a young woman with a talent for telling her left story through detailed Microsoft Paint drawings .
Determination says that the supervenient properties of a thing are a function of its base properties , while dependence says that having a supervenient property implies having a base property .
Their idea of a utopia is a world of unaccountable , unfettered corporate power where literally everything is up for sale and is negotiable .
While screen readers may correctly guess whether a header is a column header or a row header based on the table layout , assigning a scope makes this unambiguous .
A hybrid is a type of animal that is created from the mating of two other species .
A horse is the world 's biggest shit pump .
" A large part of what we have to do is dispel the perceptions that if a show is this , it ca n't be that , or if it 's that , it wo n't be successful .
Well , adding a layer of grease to a stem is a great way of strengthening it .
As earning a living was an important factor , illustration appeared to be something that could possibly bring in a living wage .
SC : The only art I saw as a child was the cartoon strip in the daily newspaper , called Rupert , the story of a bear and his friends , and the political cartoon of the day , both of which I studied .
Constructing a personality is a subtle process , often taking years .
Emotion communication requires that a message be both sent and received .
it takes a twisted government molested mind to think that generating a profit is the problem with our violence infected society .. lol ..
Oh , one last thing , a valence is a personality of one of the dramatic personnel in an engram .
Wait , I thought a valence was a window treatment .
A faith in a scam is a religion as well as a faith in the truth .
The " proportional set size " ( PSS ) of a process is the count of pages it has in memory , where each page is divided by the number of processes sharing it .
In other words , the privilege of monopolizing a site is a benefit received from society and for which society should be fully compensated ; and so , under the Georgist system , the person who wished to monopolize a site would pay a rent for it to the community , approaching 100 percent of its annual rental value , exclusive of improvements .
Doctors at the Guantanamo Bay detention camp should refuse to participate in the force-feeding of hunger strikers since such an activity is a political statement , not a medical condition argued Drs .
That memory is , for some reason , inaccessable , and an AccessViolationException is the result .
Getting a pet is a serious commitment .
A rapper calling him a racist was the WORST part of his presidency ?
* View * * view-file * A View is a collection of settings that apply to one window .
This omission is probably due to the fact that a judgment is a unified act of understanding that brings at least two representations together " under one common representation .
Consider the imaginative achievement of bringing about a movement on the basis of mathematics : the 350.org organization , under the leadership of Bill McKibben , emerging from the findings of climate scientist James Hansen to the effect that such a number was a danger point in terms of particles of carbon per million in the atmosphere .
However , this should not be a problem is the duct cover is light ( or counterweighted ) .
Creating a micromouse is a learning experience and , because of its nature , well suited to team work and can draw in people with experiences in a number of areas .
Its like reading a map also in that sense that an autobahn is the same thing in all European countries even if the British with their propensity to the eccentric call it a motorway .
I did some searching and it appears that an op-amp is the answer .
A lobber is a hole of your choice that , if it fits your budget , you take to the meetings with you and offer up as an introduction gift to the key members of the Senate or Congressional staff members you encounter and saves you the wear and tear on your own holes .
This seems to be saying a win is a win and equal to any other win .
Sometimes a horse needs a win to rise sufficiently in the ratings to qualify for a target race , sometimes a win is the last thing it needs !
does it really matter if its British asian or british black or british white at the end of the day its all british irrespective of any racial or cultural lines if a person is any good at any sport who cares if they 're black white or asian .
The other point is that a murder is a murder , in an equal society all murders should be dealt with equally , our society is unequal enough between rich and poor without introducing inequality in ill conceived legislation .
Many people find that sponsoring a light in memory of a loved one and making a dedication is a positive way to remember someone .
The effects get 8.5 / 10 the reason for not a ten being that although this is fresh ideas the idea that its still a pen and a uv light isnt new gimmic wise ...
Be careful what you buy and what you plug in an inverter is the motto .
Adopting an animal is a rewarding , heart-warming experience and the animals appreciate it even more .
His idea of one day at a time is a good one for now .
Born to Be Wild - A Retrospective is a 1991 greatest hits album by Steppenwolf .
The first impression I had from the Find Outer books from reading them as a child is the one that sticks with me , so I guess regardless of adult debate I will only ever be able to imagine these children as being from well off families .
One of the issues in which we share an interest is the way we support the enterprise spirit in this country .
4 ( 1 ) This paragraph applies to determine whether a person is an exempt person for the purpose of carrying on any activity which constitutes probate activities ( subject to paragraph 7 ) .
The choice of systems that the coalition Government want to put before the electors in a referendum is the choice of either sticking with first past the post or using the alternative vote system that we have put forward .
An example is the article cited in support of the proposition that the Association is anti-Palestinian : " The Current Conflict - Legal Aspects " , by Colonel Daniel Reisner , Head of the International Law Department ( " ILD " ) of the Israeli army , published in edition No 30 of " Justice " .
I do n't think a rower is the greatest ever .
( ii ) In deciding whether the actions are of such a different type the use by that party of a weapon is a significant factor .
In my opinion , such a thing could cause problems of it 's own and the best place for such a collar is the bin .
An Endoscope is a medical instrument made to carry two bundles of optic fibers inside one long tube .
Getting the runaround from a teenager is no way to spend a Paris evening .
When they ( barbel ) come on the feed - and this may take up to 2 hours - things can suddenly get manic and you may get a number of fish very quickly 6 to a dozen fish in an hour is a possibility !
( iv ) A commonplace was the shouting by ' protesters ' of verbal abuse of a vile sectarian nature .
Hi SdKell , The arrival of a child is a really stressful time both for the mum and for the dad .
This is simply a matter of calculating that an education is a benefit to the entire state-the state should therefore facilitate it , support it and maintain its quality-but it is 30 Nov 2010 : Column 773 also a benefit to the individual .
Where an application is a contentious one , with many groups objecting to it , the committee may only allow 1 speaker from all the objecting groups .
... and I think that anybody who would take Brand for a leader is an idiot .
I do n't recall it ever being an issue is a presidential campaign ad or a debate , ever , in any presidential race that I can remember .
But as a social scientist I would not always agree with a later sentence : " A theory is a recipe for translating your completely subjective description of the situation into an educated hypothesis about what is going to happen .
An ophthalmologist is a physician who is educated and trained to provide medical and surgical care of the eyes and related structures .
Christianity as a whole is a little different .
Personally I would say a more-or-less practical goal for a sound system installed in a room is a frequency response ± 5 dB from 200 -20,000 Hz , and maybe ± 10 dB from 10 -200 Hz .
Economist Tony Carnevale says getting a certificate is a good option for many people .
The logo is not " just a graphic " any more than a flag is a piece of colored cloth .
A doctor is the expert I go to see when I need medical advice , and I go to see a doctor precisely because I can expect him or her to know a lot more than I do .
A formant is a dark band on a wide band spectrogram , which corresponds to a vocal tract resonance .
( a ) A pacifier is an article consisting of a nipple that is intended for a young child to suck upon , but is not designed to facilitate a baby 's obtaining fluid , and usually includes a guard or shield and a handle or ring .
There 's a chance a phone is all I have to access your site , and I want the full experience I 've come to know .
A vitamin is an organic compound required as a nutrient in tiny amounts by an organism .
A reception is a coordinated effort between many professionals .
In my view , a default is the only way in which to save the situation .
During the French Revolution , a pamphlet depicting Queen Marie-Antoinette in the midst of an orgy was a powerful , if not misogynistic , way to incite a starving mob already enraged over aristocratic excess .
A timer is an excellent feature when taking a background count to establish a baseline , then followed by a contamination check over the same period .
Rhonna Robbins-Sponaas of Net Author notes that when a character is a stereotype , the story often needs a complete rewrite to turn the character into a living , breathing , three dimensional being .
It 's an experience is all I 'll say .
A commitment without a deadline is no commitment at all .
A vaccine is a manufactured preparation that helps to boost the body 's immune system against a specific pathogen that can cause disease , disability , or death .
The only reason I refer it to a dogman is the fact that I have heard through local legend that it was a dogman .
The term ' prostitute ' is used as both a noun and a verb ; a prostitute is a person who ' engages in sexual activity for payment ' , while to ' prostitute oneself ' is to ' put oneself or one 's talents to an unworthy or corrupt use for personal or financial gain ' ( Oxford Dictionaries online , 2010 ) .
But what really makes Mazda 's little roadster such a success is the fact the maker has stuck closely to the original concept : simplicity , fun and value - all three of which go a long way when it comes to pleasing car buyers .
Ephesians 5:5 5:5 & 6 " For of this you can be sure : No immoral , impure or greedy person - such a man is an idolater - has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God .
Now the first warning tells us this , that " No immoral , impure or greedy person - such a man is an idolater - has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God " v. 5 ) .
Listen again to Ephesians 5 , verses 5 and 6 " For of this you can be sure : No immoral , impure or greedy person - such a man is an idolater - has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God .
Listen again to it , Ephesians 5:5 5:5 & 6 " For of this you can be sure : No immoral , impure or greedy person - such a man is an idolater - has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God .
An example is the setting up of Nike Factories in Vietnam .
Such a person is an independent contractor , and is personally liable only , not being subject to detailed direction or control from the employer in the manner of performing the work .
A life spent in a coma is no life at all and should be brought to a dignified and peaceful close .
An easement is a property right , such as a right of way or a right to use services crossing the land and a covenant is a rule put in place by a previous owner of the land imposing either an obligation , such as to contribute to a maintenance fund or to keep a fence in good repair , or a restriction such as not to use the property for trade or business .
However adopting a child is a big commitment , and whilst 80 % of adoptions are successful , 20 % break down .
A common example of a right which would fail the test of an easement is a general right to a view , but a right of way over large country estate which was not confined to a particular road or path may also fail .
I am satisfied that such a claim is a relevant head of claim .
The suitability of such a repair is a matter for close consultation between the operator and provider .
The case is useful because it establishes that the clamping of a car is a trespass to that car .
Another negative aspect that was named by a majority is the complex structure of the platform .
For example , a mortgage is a secured debt in which the home is collateral .
One of the beneficial effects of publishing a report is the opportunity to set out guidance on future conduct designed to secure safe care .
Her family seem happy with it , her friends seem happy with it , the only people with a problem are the great British public , who obviously knew her better than everyone else because they used to read about her in the papers ...
I have believed that a statue is the only way in which to pay tribute to someone such as Diana .
Loan options a mortgage is a loan for which your home serves as the collateral .
Surely a grade is a grade , if the grade has no teaching requirement then the standard should be the same for teaching / non-teaching people who achieve that belt .
well let me set a few things straight u sed about becoming an instructor is all about going to a few seminars and then you are given a black + white instructors belt meaning you can teach at whatever grade you are at the time ...
So if I thought an instructor was a waste of time I would say so , trust me I would n't pay out for something I do n't think is right .
To me a life is a life .
An injunction is a remedy that is an order by the court to behave in a certain way .
So the concept of a hypocrisy is a weapon to be used not a moral concept to live by unless you follow Jesus .
The showcase is part of a series put on by Nomadic Wax called Internationally Known ( Africa is a Country is a co-sponsor ) , and features Thiat from Kuer Gui ( whose video we featured here ) and the group Fou Malade were two of the groups that were central to the Y ' en a Marre movement ( whose politics we featured here ) .
A habitat is the environment in which an organism or species lives and includes the physical characteristics e.g. , climate or the availability of suitable food and shelter ) that make it especially well suited to meet the life cycle needs of that species .
An ecosystem is a unique combination of plant , animal and microorganism communities and their non-living physical characteristics interacting as a functional unit .
Apparently , having a prescription is a non-issue .
" A settlement is a victory , " says Michael Hausfeld , an architect of the Holocaust settlements who was not involved in the Shell case .
It 's been said that a liberal is a conservative who has been mugged .
I suggest that a retributivist is a skeptic with children .
" I suggest that a retributivist is a skeptic with children .
A classfileset is a specialized type of fileset which , given a set of " root " classes , will include all of the class files upon which the root classes depend .
Thus a circle is the special case of an ellipse for which the eccentricity is 0 .
It says that an ellipse in the plane P can always be realized as the intersection of P with a right circular cone K with vertex v outside the plane --- in other words , an ellipse is a conic section .
A negaqeggun is a " net gauge , used to keep mesh uniform while making a net , " and a qilakeggun is a " net gauge , implement used to measure the mesh size while making a fishnet " ( Jacobson 1984 ) .
A mere buyer who believes an item is a fake has almost no recourse .
These provisions are self-evident ; cooperation with the defense of a claim is a requirement for coverage under the LEF .
Replacing meat with fish a few times a week is a great way to keep cholesterol lowered and to lose weight .
To govern the affairs of a corporation was an infringement on liberty .
" An example is this recent query , which involves a difficult multivariate multilevel model .
Note that when a view is a SWING component that overrides the paintComponent method , update cannot call paintComponent directly .
A process is the high level view of what work is done in your organization , while procedures are the detailed steps that need to be performed to complete the process .
One man with a club is a hooligan .
A prion is a substance that 's able to induce abnormal folding of normal cellular proteins .
( An accession is an instrument of ratification deposited by a country which has not signed the Convention .
MK : A poem is a song and a prayer as opposed to a wing and one .
Recording a video is a nice change of pace as well from your daily routine and it can help spark creativity .
The test of a vocation is the love of the drudgery it involves .
Researching and finding such a product is the biggest obstacle facing most people who want to setup online businesses .
Making a website is a totally different matter and you need separate guidelines and books for this topic , which you can get from the website listed below .
Elucidation : An elucidation is a short note , often just a few words , intended to comment on and clarify - elucidate , as it were - a small unit , usually a word or even a part of a word , of Finnegans Wake .
At any level of baseball , winning a championship is an amazing feeling and accomplishment .
Riley 's review article , the first red flag for me as a diver is the " water taxi " dive boat .
Sending a message is a quick and easy way to stay in contact with family , friends or work , on the S 5600 there are messaging services such as SMS , MMS ( multimedia messaging service ) , EMS , Email and instant messenger so there is no excuse not to stay in touch .
Now ladies , I know you all think a massage is a massage right ?
For example , if a hospital nurse inputs " almond allergy " into an electronic patient record , " what the system needs to know is that an allergy is a type of disease and that an almond is a kind of nut , because in the system it only knows about nut allergies-it has no record of almond allergies , " he says .
Obviously if the absorptions of all the components in a mixture are the same then there is no absorption problem .
This in a sense is an Ignatian form of discernment .
Seeking possession of a property is a long and expensive process and there are usually better ways of stopping people from acting in an unacceptable way .
How valuable a resource is this ?
Clubs at the grassroots of sports from cycling to boccia move to capitalise on surge in post-Games interest The Paralympics inspired thousands of Britons to decide that having a disability was no barrier to sport as they cheered on David Weir , Ellie Simmonds and other stars of the Games .
Ray Beanie A beanie is an essential accessory for any winter trip keep your ears and head warm .
Pom Pom Beanie A beanie is an essential accessory for any winter trip keep your ears and head warm .
Zig Zag Beanie A beanie is an essential accessory for any winter trip keep your ears and head warm .
Values time spent with her girlfriends to whom finding Loraine a date is a regular and fun , Friday night sport .
He recognised that cutting SWA cable with a hacksaw was a laborious and time-consuming task and was frustrated by how difficult it was to get a perfectly straight circumference with no ragged edges , which often resulted in an unsatisfactory seating inside the cable gland .
One of the most common pets that can be present in a house is a cat .
Strictly speaking , a chateau is a French castle ; to qualify as such , it should have either a tower or several corner turrets of the kind seen on fairy-tale castles .
Though such an observation be no way to the honour of the tutors in that university , who , in reading Rohault , do only read a philosophical romance to their pupils , almost perpetually contradicted by the better notes thereto belonging .
A crate is a great tool for toilet training a puppy .
a windmill is a sort of rarity in this country , abounding so much with rivers , & brooks : for which reason they chiefly use watermills .
A belt is a piece of clothing mainly burberry sale support trousers and other like articles of clothing .
A golygon is a lattice polygon where all angles are right-angles , and the sides have consecutive integer lengths { 1 , 2 , 3 , ...
A golyhedron is a polyhedron P obeying the four aforementioned regularity conditions and possessing area sequence { 1 , 2 , 3 , ...
offers the ( bad ) argument that since any concept of a body is a mental item , this proves that all bodies are really mental things .
, the general concept of a triangle is a triangle without any particular length of its sides , angles , etc. , but this would be a triangle which is not a triangle ( i.e. , a triangle without an angle , length of sides , etc.óa contradiction ) , just as a general motion would be a motion without a particular speed ( another contradiction ) .
In many of these theories , such claims as , " a line is the shortest distance between two points " , no longer hold true ( since the shortest distance could be a curve , etc. ) ñand , in addition , it is possible that a posteriori experience of the world might be able to determine if space is either Euclidean or non-Euclidean .
• " The only good thing that has ever come out of a war was a song , " Johnny Cash once said .
I thought of Confucius ' " An inconvenience is an unrecognized opportunity , " but even the ducks seemed tired of the rain and the beavers had wisely checked into their dam lodges for the rest of the season .
cPanel Plugins While loosely defined , a plugin is a collection of items associated with your application .
By its nature , a movement is an ongoing entity that can advance continuously toward its goals over a long period of time .
In some cases , we assume that there is no probability that an individual is an illegal alien , such as a person who indicates that he or she is receiving Social Security payments or who is a U.S. veteran .
There were so many things that we had no idea what people would pay , so an auction was the only place for them .
But , since my favorite idea of a meal is a bunch of little appetizers finished off by a scrumptious dessert , I figured these beautiful bundles of figs and goat cheese would fit the " starter " bill perfectly .
Unworkability is gently suggested - the therapist highlights how hard the client has been thinking and working at the change agenda , and that consulting a therapist is another attempt to find a solution .
A choice is a selection among alternatives that may be made with reasons but not for reasons .
Kait_Gamble : The thing with being an artist is the amount of time we spend alone creating , working , or simply thinking about our work .
I was being rather restrictive about it , which in a way is a good thing .
A packet is a small piece of data inside a communication stream , which is self contained and can be checked for correctness .
A firewall is a program running on a Gateway , Bridge or PC / Laptop / Smartphone that is capable of filtering incoming , outgoing , and forwarded network packets .
Being a virgin is a stigma and it is going to hold you back at your current age .
In Hindu mythology , an avatar is another incarnation .
The tow is the secondary weapon and this part of the model shows where the tow comes out of , a bone is a part of a model that is usually there to show where something is " WeaponLaunchBone = SECONDARY WeaponB WeaponFireFXBone = TERTIARY WeaponB " how can the humvee shoot a diferent missile that goes farther and is homing than the one it uses for ground combat ?
In other words , a Context is a stateful object with member values .
A feed is a function of special software that allows feedreaders to access a site , automatically looking for new content and then posting the information about new content and updates to another site .
An interview is a chance to convey how you can contribute to an academic setting .
An example is the Echo , which I ca n't even find to test drive in New England .
The choice between having a child one is not prepared for ( financially or parentally ) , giving a child up for adoption or having an abortion is a grim one .
As for how the Lyto is going to affect photography and how letting a viewer manipulate an image is a good or bad thing , I really want to hear from you in the comments and let me know what you think .
" It 's more than a conference and more than a hackathon-it 's a community event for people to come out and hear some great speakers , sit with some outstanding mentors , or build something cool to show the community .
But shooting a tag into the dorsal fin of a whale is an invasive procedure , so they limit the number of tags placed each year .
" What differentiates a poison from a remedy is the dose .
You probably find , as I did , that you meet people out walking - a dog is a great way just to stop and say hello , to even build up friendships .
He was a true supporter , Greenhall said , and the district where he was an alumnus was a big part of his life .
An exit questionnaire showed that subjects ' chief reason for making such a sacrifice was a belief that the singing would be more enjoyable if it encompassed the whole group .
A passport is the preferable piece of identification for entry into Canada .
For the purposes of section 284.01 of the Act , a prescribed return for a reporting period of a person is a return for the reporting period that is required to be filed by way of electronic filing in accordance with subsection 278.1 ( 2.1 ) of the Act .
A vanpool is a new transportation service for people who make the same trip most days .
A group is an auxiliary function for operating SpeciesAlias collectively , in order to increase the efficiency of the edit work of a network diagram .
The cost of a project is an indicator of its size and the complexity of its construction and operation .
[ According to * Webster 's * , an occupation is the principal business of one 's life .
* * A blog is a simple web page that anyone can set up in minutes .
* * Having a blog is a vital part of making money on the internet .
Buying a house is an emotional and scary experience , especially for first-time buyers , and if the home inspection comes back with a major repair needed , it could scare them off , even if the seller agrees to fix it .
In the only really proper sense of the term , an Americanism is a word or phrase naturally used by an educated American which under similar conditions would not be used by an educated Englishman .
" A ringtone is an audio clip that signals an incoming cell phone call .
A cancer is an uncontrolled proliferation of cells .
Evidence : Although normal tissues of a woman are a mosaic of cells in which one X chromosome or the other has been inactivated [ Link ] , all her tumor cells - even if from multiple sites - have the same X chromosome inactivated .
images / dunhuang of sixteen Arhats as the central theme of a cave was a trend which originated in Cave No 97 cut in Western Xia .
The phrase about 1803 tonnes makes perfect sense because a tonne is a measuring unit .
The only possibility provided for in Brazilian criminal law for the re-opening of an investigation is the discovery of new evidence related to the case , pursuant to article 18 of the Code of Criminal Procedure , [ 11 ] and to Series 524 of the Supreme Federal Court .
Such an examination is a summary analysis that does not imply any prejudice or preliminary opinion on the merits .
For an artist who specialized in shock tactics , Smith becoming a housewife was the ultimate esthetic outrage .
A caricature is the ideal gift for any occasion , Birthdays , Retirement , Weddings , leaving for a new job etc. It 's also the perfect gift for the person who has everything as it 's not something you can buy in the shop and each picture is unique and personalised .
The only thing unique in such an approach is the object of study .
A mortgage is a secured debt because the loan is backed by the value of the house itself .
A budget is a financial plan that allocates a specific amount of money to be spent on certain commodities like food , clothing , mortgage or rental payments , entertainment and savings .
A disaccharide is a carbohydrate molecule that contains two monosaccharides .
Each cell in the body contains approximately four thousand different enzymes .12 The enzyme composition of a cell is an important determinant of the cell 's function .
A toe-kick is the best weapon for scoring goals indoor .
Now a synapse is the end of a nerve , which feathers out like fingers on a hand .
Now , the state of the art has been improving in the last couple of years , but still a computer 's no match for a human being , for , say , a stenographer , and one of the reasons is the computer has a really hard time finding the boundary between words .
A fan is the other half of the equation .
So , can a homosexual be a Christian ?
One major problem that must be solved before human stem cell therapy becomes a reality is the threat of rejection of the transplanted cells by the host 's immune system ( if the stem cells are allografts ; that is , come from a genetically-different individual ) .
Three wins in a season is an accomplishment .
Try to design legal rules so that the party in the best position to reduce a cost is the one who must bear it .
A second is a rule of expectation damages : I am permitted to breach but must reimburse you for the resulting costs .
So they figured a concert was a good way to get some legal dosh , and who better than the people 's minstrels , with their crowd pleasing ditties such as Whatever Thou Wants , Big Fat Wench and There 's Something ' bout You Maiden I Lust After ...
An interdict is a court order , not a wall of steel .
A pen is a statement or fashion accessory now , like cufflinks or a boutonnière : slightly nostalgic , slightly pretentious , certainly not everyday .
But many more of us will be laid at last under headstones inscribed with the lovely lettering we almost managed to master for a while , until we decided that scratching our ideas in characters upon a surface was a task too primitive for us .
Bear in mind that if a user is a member of a group where " Rating " , " Comments " or " Public albums upload " is set " YES " , s / he will have the right to perform these operations only in albums where they are allowed .
The romantic lines of A lamentation are a perfect example for those studying or taking a course in English literature .
Such a process is a very long way off technically , but studies in mice suggest that it might one day be possible .
A trademark is an arbitrary word , name , symbol , or device used to distinguish a particular product .
The a particle is a helium nucleus ; b particle is an electron e - .
Dumping a vehicle is an offence with maximum penalties of a £ 2500 fine or 3 months imprisonment .
Helpfully the court discussed that it felt that , conceptually , a deposit was a means by which a buyer could demonstrate a commitment to completing a transaction .
Having a stroke is a bit like winning an Oscar ; there are so many people to thank .
To describe our journey through life as a pilgrimage is an overworked metaphor , but a useful one as we look back over Austin 's life and thank God for his achievements and our memories of him .
Since , keeping consistency in a thesis is a tough task and a little difficult to edit .
It should be noted that a photograph is a product of the modern environmental energy pattern of light and that any photograph can be beneficially manipulated with the paper pierced with the five holes .
A speaker is a low impedance device nominally 4 R or 8 R ( but if you look a Noel 's graphs in HiFi World you 'll know the curves are not flat and vary with frequency ) .
Whereas , a valve is a high impedance device , so it loves voltages and does not use much current , typically a few mA .
That inward cheer was duly delivered when it became clear that Safran Foer had come to the conclusion that being a vegetarian was the logical thing to do after his research for the book Eating Animals .
Nobody comes to watch so you have no feedback and the show in the Clore in front of an audience is the first time anyone from the Company has seen it .
A pump is a pump , whether it works or not .
A reprimand is a confirmation of actually being guilty of the offense , but it 's by no means a penalty .
A warning was all that was required .
By what others have got a pen was the only option to remain consistent .
A hysteroscopy is a bit different from an internal scan hun ( I presume you mean you 've had a transvaginal scan , the dildo cam one ) .
A hysteroscopy is a camera that passes inside your womb to look around and can pick up things that a scan ca n't including any womb abnormalities like womb shape , scarring , womb lining quality etc. ' Maybe baby ' on here had 5 chemicals and a hysteroscopy discovered a womb abnormality which was operable now she 's 37 weeks pregnant .
However it should be noted that courts already have discretion to take into account an offender 's individual circumstances when determining an appropriate sentence , and sentencing guidelines make clear that if an offender is the sole or primary carer for dependent relatives then this should he considered a mitigating factor for avoiding a custodial sentence .
" Deliberately attempting to mislead a committee is a contempt of the House " .
I knew the Malfoys considered themselves to be true gourmets , and training as a chef was a little-known family tradition .
A bunion is a bony deformity of the joint at the base of the big toe .
A radiograph is a detailed image that allows the bony structure of your foot to be clearly seen and the extent of the deformity caused by the bunion to be assessed .
X-ray An X-ray is a painless way of producing pictures of the inside of the body using radiation .
An osteotomy is the most common type of bunion surgery .
Removing a fan is a breeze ( ahem ! ) , here the top fan has been removed , showing the grill in the front panel .
An enema is a small tube that is placed into your anus .
A sphincteroplasty is an operation to repair damaged sphincter muscles .
A colostomy is a surgical procedure in which your colon ( lower bowel ) is cut and brought through the wall of your stomach to create an artificial opening called a stoma .
Ahh , back when games were harsh , and they took months to complete , because there were no saves , and there was no nice easy continues ... when you were dead , you were dead , and completing a game was a real achievement ...
A textured toy , perhaps impregnated with catnip , inside a rattle-sack is a good option though not all cats respond to catnip .
Becoming enthusiastically involved in a process is the initial germ of artistic creativity , whether it is a child playing with clay or stones , or an established musical composer putting together the parts of a new quartet .
The only reason he is n't more of a bust is the Cardinals offense is just that good .
On these theories a proposition is the set of possible worlds in which it is true , or a function that has the value True when it takes as argument a world where the proposition is true and has the value False when it takes as argument a world where the proposition is false .
According to the Russellian conception of propositions , a proposition is a complex entity with a particular structure whose constituents are particulars and / or properties and / or relations .
These combinations must respect the form of states of affairs ( thus Aristotle 's being wise is an actualised combination , Aristotle 's being a general is an unactualised combination , and wisdom 's being Aristotle does not respect the form of states of affairs and so does not fall in the range of combinations defined by particulars and universals ) .
People are referred to as " specimens " and the only fear expressed over the possibility of bringing various " specimen " together for a display was that : " ... if specimens of the more independent tribes fell sick and died in Calcutta or on the journey , it might lead to inconvenient political complications .
The author of a report is the person most familiar with the report content and structure and will be able to add in , or amend , data if omissions become apparent during markup .
" Sometimes a virus is the inciting agent , sometimes it might be a chemical or environmental factor , or even a combination of exposures .
A bridge is an organic structure containing both single and double carbon-to-carbon bonds .
Such a problem is the optimal interconnection of parallel processors having large numbers of computational modes .
However defined , a neighborhood is a key setting for adolescent development .
Adding a universe is a reflection process : we add a type U whose objects are the types considered so far .
In this view , type theory appears as a vast generalization of set theory , since a set is a particular kind of type .
Highlighted below in a sentence was the word , ' AWE ' .
The word antibiotic comes from the Greek anti meaning ' against ' and bios meaning ' life ' ( a bacterium is a life form ) .
Explaining what you 're feeling rather than making a face is the best way to get on the road to reconciliation .
Nevertheless such a slaughter was a most dreadful action which would have brought enormous fear and mourning to the town .
The key to such an approach is a clear signal from the IU administrators as to what programs or disciplines should receive the greatest support in the materials budget .
A mudd is the amount contained by a man 's cupped hands .
" ' Still ' , I thought to myself , ' a deal 's a deal ' , and I grimaced with pride as I donned my weapons grade marigold rubber gloves and attempted to display my best technique to the watching millions , by galloping frothily up and down their respective shafts like a pole dancer ... only with two poles .
Being a landlord is a business just like any other .
Doctors routinely discuss the effects and potential consequences of a treatment with patients as this is a doctor being a doctor .
Intermingled with the doctor being a doctor is the doctor functioning as pitchmen and agent for financial concerns in the medical industry ; first up him / herself .
' Abdullah ibn ' Amr reported that the Prophet , may Allah bless him and grant him peace , said , " A Muslim is the one from whose tongue and hand the Muslims are safe .
If a runner is a tenth of a second faster or slower running his leg , that may not affect the outcome much at all , but if the baton handoff is botched , the race is lost .
While the selection of a beneficiary is a matter of free election for the insured and the insured should never be forced to designate otherwise , under Public Law 109 -13 if a Servicemember is married the Department of Defense must provide written notification to their spouse of a change of designation .
But the best proof that the danger of overpruning is a bugaboo is the extraordinary effectiveness so often attained by severely ill or severely handicapped people .
By itself , however , a specialty is a fragment and sterile .
" A decision is a judgment .
And a decision without an alternative is a desperate gambler 's throw , no matter how carefully thought through it might be .
( 2 ) For the purposes of subsection ( 1 ) , a transaction is a representative transaction if its terms are reasonably typical of the terms of the credit agreements to which the advertisement relates .
A dictionary is a book which lists words of a language along with their meanings .
A doublet is the use in some languages of two ( or more ) terms conjoined to create an expression which typically intensifies the meaning of either term used alone .
An epistle is a letter , a literary composition which serves as correspondence between individuals or groups .
As for the people of Mina , their praying for it in a group is a blameworthy innovation .
When will people realize that this de facto , rogue , charade of a Government are the real terrorists ??
The position of a symbol is a shortcut for other numbers 123 means 100 + 20 + 3 .
cube : A cube is a special square prism ... all six faces are identical squares .
' poly ' = many ; ' edron ' = face ] : A polyhedron is any closed solid shape consisting of four or more polygon-shaped faces in which pairs of polygon faces join along edges and three or more edges meet at a vertex .
tetrahedron : A tetrahedron is a triangular pyramid which has four triangular faces ; when the four faces are identical equilateral triangles , it is called a regular tetrahedron .
" " Heresies are this : trying to understand with our minds and with only our personal light who Jesus is , " he observed , adding that " A great English writer wrote that a heresy is an idea that 's gone crazy .
A lexicon is the collection of words and word parts used by people speaking a particular language .
A dictionary is a kind of lexicon .
A morpheme is the smallest unit of meaning in a language .
" I had no objections to a midwife being the person in charge , but unfortunately the beurocracy of the matter took that option away from us .
( Available on the National Statistics website . ) Also , I think a 17 - year-old telling a labouring woman what to do when she herself has never had a child is an example of the sensibility of which NG speaks .
Also , I think a 17 - year-old telling a labouring woman what to do when she herself has never had a child is an example of the sensibility of which NG speaks She was a student not a midwife and no offense but she was an incredibly capable person , precisely the type of person that I would want telling me what to do in that situation and I speak as a woman capable of birthing a child .
( the human birth process did not really keep up with evolution I am afraid ) We have recent personal experience , started off at home but ended up in the hospital anyway , and eventually a C-section was the only option .
Thinking of the base of an exponent as a growth rate and the exponent as a time is a nice way to extend beyond repeated multiplication .
Thus : a shield , we say , is the " drinking-bowl of Ares , " and a bow is the " chordless lyre .
The cost for replacing a slide is the same as acquiring a new slide , except that the library can reuse the cataloging data from the original slide .
When a problem is this massive - a thousand square miles of coastal lands have already disappeared - exactly what is the best course of action ?
How to use a tripod The weakest part of a tripod is the center column .
It was the kind of summer holiday afternoon when poking some mud with a stick was the most entertaining thing we could think of .
Why is it that every so often some new ideas come around , the industry creates a hype and some tooling , tries to make everybody not part of the hype feel bad about their professional qualifications and then - as fast as it was built up it 'll be broke down by mostly the same crowd or the crowd that never got the message that a concept is a concept not a recipe for success .
An alternative is the HCV protease inhibitor simeprevir ( Olysio ) for 12 weeks plus pegylated interferon and ribavirin for 24 weeks .
Missing a race is the worst , but you are definitely being smart about this injury .
A nanometer is a billionth of a metre that is about 1 / 80,000 of the diameter of a human hair .
A landfill is a waste disposal site for the deposit of waste onto or into the land .
A canon is a highly structured and disciplined literary form ; an icon in words rather than paint .
[ 14 ] Although the only document I know which actually makes Palladius a martyr is the highly fabulous Life of St .
An Arrestment is a process whereby a creditor ensures that money or moveable effects belonging to the debtor , which are in the hands of a third party , are not passed to the debtor .
My setup for the endoscope shot : Wolf Endoscope 0 ° attached to 105 mm lens and fiber optics lights Working with an endoscope is an exciting challenge that I heartily suggest you try .
That they realistically think this is a solution is an interesting assessment of the federalists understanding of the world - bright people ( I presume ) who are so blinded by ' evident truths ' they miss the real truth ( mind you , they probably say the same about us ... ) .
The crafty humour and celebrity cameos that Russell T Davies loved so much are present too , as we find out that the reason Wilf gave for Sylvia Noble not letting him have a webcam were all too valid , in scenes that adults will find funny for reasons they probably wo n't want to go into with young children ( who 'll find their own jokes in the same dialogue ) .
The idea that a bankrupt is any less worthy than any other member of society of being an MP or school governor is ludicrous .
An example is the carbon cycle Biological control is control of pests by the introduction of other living things , rather than pesticides , into their environment .
However , whether the behaviour of a driver or the actions of a passenger were the contributing factor in a vehicle collision , those adversely affected may be justified in seeking compensation from an experienced road traffic accident solicitor .
A clear example of why undertaking is wrong , if a car is the middle lane you should be able to overtake and pull in front with worrying about hitting the vehicle .
That , and there 's no denying a nice 800 × 480 screen on a smartphone is a big draw .
Where a company is a member of a group , the SAO for any one company may fulfil that role for some or all of the UK companies within the group providing that they are an officer or director of a group company and do actually have overall responsibility for the company 's financial accounting arrangements .
Let no one have secret possessions : such a person is no monk .
Let no one be over confident in speech : such a person is a worker of destruction .
A third is the Church 's teaching regarding the absolute invilability of the seal of the sacrament of reconciliation .
The island is a single sphere of sovereignty ; the existence of a sovereign is a necessary corollary of that .
A cheeter is a naughty cat ?
A problem / request logging system ( currently RMS Servicedesk ) will be employed to track calls and ensure that requests and problems are logged ; users will receive email confirmation when a job is both logged and closed .
If a thing is a good to itself , much more must its perfection , its Form , its better , be a good to it ; this better , good in its own nature , must be good also to the quester whose good it procures .
Universally , what approaches as a good is a Form ; Matter itself contains this good which is Form : are we to conclude that , if Matter had will , it would desire to be Form unalloyed ?
According to the NBER , a recession is a " significant decline in economic activity lasting more than a few months .
We also envy those whose possession of or success in a thing is a reproach to us : these are our neighbours and equals ; for it is clear that it is our own fault we have missed the good thing in question ; this annoys us , and excites envy in us .
Broadly speaking , however , the only sort of person who can strictly be called a judge is the man who decides the issue in some matter of public controversy ; that is , in law suits and in political debates , in both of which there are issues to be decided .
Now an Enthymeme is a syllogism dealing with such practical subjects .
To get these five songs from The Wall as an encore was an incredible bonus , ending with Comfortably Numb and blowing my mind .
A queue is an entity that supports the notion of named subjects of interest .
An agent is a persistent logical subscribing entity that expresses interest in a queue through a subscription .
In this context , an agent is an electronic proxy for a publisher or subscriber .
A client is a transient physical entity .
A collection is an ordered group of elements , all of the same type ( for example , the grades for a class of students ) .
A package is an encapsulated collection of related program objects stored together in the database .
An object is a collection of objects that represent the description information about a particular schema object in the database .
As an example , a papaya is a really good bowel cleanser but when you juice the papaya , that bowel cleansing quality is gone .
A backseat is a digital acne for trauma who wants to exquisite a noni without the peel of repairs , windpipe and inspected teams like eye shoveling .
Assembling them into a show is another thing .
Through the veil of floating drizzle on top of a mountain is a solitary goat .
The idea of ' use ' in a product is a strange beast when it always has to say " do this " or " do that " on it .
What I look in a brand is a car which evolved , a car which is being the evolution of years of customer feed back and reliability .
Mason reflects that " one of the reasons Syd is still a legend is the James Dean syndrome , that thing of not fulfilling what seems to be your destiny .
A contract is a private matter between two people which does not affect third parties .
Once I 'd calmed down and convinced myself that buying a newspaper was a good thing , I thought the next thing to do would be to wander round the stand and see what newspapers took my fancy .
If the database character encoding scheme is single-byte , then the number of bytes and the number of characters in a column is the same .
Just as a view is a virtual table , an object view is a virtual object table .
Note : the default value for a attribute is the same as that for a attribute .
Likewise , also , if drawn from the genus ; for if ' to be an animal is an attribute of S ' , then 'S is an animal ' .
This mistake is most commonly made in regard to the genera of things , e.g. if one were to say that white happens ( accidit ) to be a colour-for being a colour does not happen by accident to white , but colour is its genus .
This rule is not convertible , either , for the purpose of overthrowing a predication : for several predicates of which we cannot speak of a greater degree belong absolutely : for the term ' man ' is not attributed in greater and less degrees , but a man is a man for all that .
Mann J : " while there were no hard and fast rules for determining whether an object was a sculpture for the purposes of copyright law , various factors must be considered .
The only thing that puts me off a bit is the extreme mood swings of the main character .
A flame is a process of becoming , involving a constant interchange of moist and dry .
Democritus says that the earth is full of water and that when a quantity of rain-water is added to this an earthquake is the result .
As a faint sound is ' inaudible ' , so in a sense is a loud or violent sound .
A laryngectomy is an operation to remove the voice box ( larynx ) .
MICRONS A micron is a unit of length equal to 1 millionth of a meter or 000039th ( 39 millionth ) of an inch .
Cleaning the total volume of air contained within a room is the equivalent of completely changing the air in that room .
Thus we must advance from generalities to particulars ; for it is a whole that is best known to sense-perception , and a generality is a kind of whole , comprehending many things within it , like parts .
The Crown sought to argue that conveying specified prohibited material into a prison was an offence of absolute or at least strict liability .
As far as this lot are concerned , boy bands are the metal bits that secure those things that bob on the sea , and a groupie is the plural of a grouper .
I have n't noticed if they have been doing this with other parties ( Labour and Conservative are n't cut back ) I do n't believe an abbreviation is the correct way to display such important information .
A naturum is a visitor centre with activities and exhibitions , located in connection with several of Sweden 's national parks and nature reserves .
I think a difference of opinion that involves complaints to a neighbour is a dispute by definition .
Householders should always check if a business is a registered waste carrier by calling the Environment Agency on 0370 8506506 or visiting uriblank .
I think the ability to withdraw $ 1200 a month is a very good return .
' a conurbation is an area occupied by a continuous series of dwellings , factories and other buildings , harbour and docks , urban parks and playing fields , etc which are not separated from each other by rural land ; though in many cases in this country such an urban area includes enclosures of rural land which is still in agricultural occupation ' .
Thirdly the claim that a Monarchy is a more sucessful political system that protects democracy and ensures economic success .
As to ' value for money ' , the Royal Family are a damn sight more economical than that bunch of money grabbing , self serving , parasites in the house of commons === I think you 'll find historical life under a monarch was no great pleasure for our ancestors ( or the French or Russian people ) .
A journal is a notebook or other semi-permanent container housing the writings of one student .
[ / p ] [ / quote ] The only difference with becoming an academy is the school will no longer be under the control of the Local Education Authority .
However there are two gates prior to the front door which you need a fob to get through , and given that the keypads were down on occassions having a fob was the only way .
A sponsor is an individual or company that initiates a clinical study .
A monitor is an individual selected by a sponsor or CRO to oversee the clinical investigation .
Sports and recreation facilities are delivered by local authorities , and any opening or closure of such a facility is a matter for the local authority concerned .
Entitlement to a copyright is a matter of fact and it varies from case to case .
Go on , tell me all about " you do n't know how deep the sea is , you do n't know nuffin , a foot is a tiny percentage of the depth . .
Thus a secondhand chassis on a vehicle is an Automatic Q plate .
" Being a moderate is a negative in this campaign and that 's very unfortunate , because the majority of Americans are moderate and well balanced in their thought process .
Such resilience is essential because becoming an expert is a long process - it requires at least 10,000 hours , says Malcolm Gladwell in Outliers : The Story of Success ( 2008 ) .
A franchise is a kind of heavy handed license agreement and usually is a complete business model not just intellectual property but business practises , marketing , training and often includes the requirement to purchase materials and products from the licensor - a complete business in a box .
' Managing a coastline is a black art really , ' he says .
A hostage is a person held in the power of an adversary in order to obtain specific actions , such as the release of prisoners , from the other party to the conflict .
:sad: :sad: hi sheila i carnt remember having bad summer when we were kids i still say we were the luckest jenaration to be bought up in the 50 and 60 we had the best music a freind was a freind very little crime not a lot of money but we new how to have fun smile too right there ben we were lucky .
hi sheila i carnt remember having bad summer when we were kids i still say we were the luckest jenaration to be bought up in the 50 and 60 we had the best music a freind was a freind very little crime not a lot of money but we new how to have fun smile HI LESMITH , I could n't agree more .
hi sheila i carnt remember having bad summer when we were kids i still say we were the luckest jenaration to be bought up in the 50 and 60 we had the best music a freind was a freind very little crime not a lot of money but we new how to have fun smile hi ben , thought id struck gold looking for barbara stephenson , looks like the wrong one .
A union is a group of employees in which a majority decide to bargain collectively to try to improve wages , benefits and working conditions .
Manton Reece suggested among other things that counting the number of links in a description is a good idea-a change in links is probably a significant change , more than just a typo fix .
A compliment is a gift and , when you deflect it , you 're refusing a gift , a social faux pas about as bad as grabbing your grandmother 's chest .
A byte is an 8 - bit unsigned quantity .
A word is a 16 - bit unsigned quantity .
And got a master 's the next year ?
The attention score for a group is the average of the score of the feeds inside the group .
A second was the significance of education generally , and adult education specifically , in the struggle to sustain democratic citizenship .
A wise man once said that you can tell what a person is all about ( ie , how successful they are / will be ) by the five people they 're closest to in their life .
' An analogy is the recent bill for amnesty and the regularization of illegal immigrants : India has had to wait ; it will have to demonstrate that it will be a responsible nuclear weapons state ; and it will receive no special advantage , but its fundamental status will change .
An example is the National The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information purposesonly .
' A customer is the most important visitor on our premises .
A coffer is a kind of container .
Perhaps calling it a circus is a bit cynical , but the term circus can also be seen in a positive way , as a ' functioning anarchy ' , which we have been for the past 65 years .
Those who seek , will find - that is not a possibility-it is a promise .
A risk is any situation that may significantly reduce members ' benefits such as inadequate funding , poor record-keeping or potential dishonesty .
I know it really sucks to look at it that way , but I 've started to develop the mentality that I 've been living my life at a sprint 's pace , but unfortunately the road to recovering from a microfracture is a marathon .
Mould in a bathroom is a direct result of moisture in the air and the condensation which results , which in turn encourages the mould to grow .
Carrying a baby is a fundamental activity of all parents yet this simple practice can be anxiety-producing when a non-traditional practice is introduced .
Somewhere that is particularly worth a visit is the pilgrimage town of Muktinath .
Whatever your situation , making a will is an efficient and inexpensive way of ensuring that your wishes are complied with .
The 2010 TV ad featuring visually impaired footballers kicking a cat was that year 's most complained about advert .
We had preserved milk when we first came on board , horrible stuff , a cow is a great want .
I have tried to indicate somewhere in my listings if a plant is a deliberate introduction and what its status is .
Many of these are lined by mature trees , an example being those avenues of horse-chestnuts Aesculus hippocastanum that radiate from the main gate .
I toyed last summer with the idea of doing a ' goth ' swimsuit , on the grounds that a suntan is a no no !
Second , the information component or potential of a weapon is the portion of a weapon that uses information technology ( digitalization , miniaturization of control systems ) to increase the weapon 's lethality and accuracy .
To carry a cross was a public statement that the one shouldering it was to be impaled upon it .
At the moment , the maximum penalty for failing to stop or failing to report an accident is a paltry six months imprisonment or a fine .
Satan is real and to ignore him or treat him as a joke is a dangerous game .
A port is an abstraction for the connection points used for network services , such as e-mail and the WWW .
A FlexPod is an architectural blueprint listing validated components that can be bought and bolted together to provide a system with defined capacity and performance characteristics .
Having a colostomy is a big change in your life .
There is no doubt at all that a press and possible a crusher is a must .
To call her a dog or a bitch is an insult to dogs ...
Graeme Leach , chief economist at the Institute of Directors , adds : " A month is a long time in economics .
" Having been told a degree was the key to a successful and prosperous life , and having worked hard and sacrificed a lot to get one , many Scots have then found themselves entrenched instead in a culture of unemployment or low wages and short term contracts .
Skill i cant believe your telling me that £ 2 a kilo is a factor if thats the case if someone cracks off they must have a breakdown .
as far as I was last aware a fish is a very very different animal to a human and their diets are very very different .
Of course , it 's a tool , in much the same way that a book is a tool .
A refugee is a person outside their own country who needs and deserves protection because they reasonably believe that their civil or political status puts them at risk of serious harm in that country and that their own government cannot or will not protect them .
I think a fish is the same , it needs different food sources at different times of the year .
All a boilie is to a carp is a food source and if it ticks the right boxes , then a carp will eat it ( if hungry of course ) .
" Coming together to share a meal is an important part of life , so what better way to raise money for Shooting Star CHASE than to cook and eat with friends and family .
I never say an item is the same UNLESS it has been confirmed elsewhere .
In 1972 I married an Anglican vicar : a vicarage is the least quiet place imaginable - a house that is never your own and never empty or silent .
Does anyone have a how to of taking the inner trim off the door so I can take a closer look , I 'm quite a beginner mechanics wise but am practically minded so would replacing a regulator be a DIY job or best left to a professional ?
Tribunal chairman Mr James told Mr Pritchard the panel had to consider whether referring to homosexuality as a disability was a breach of the council 's code of conduct .
Dorothy asks a question-what are some of the data sources for your research work ?
For this reason I also bought the Aztec Single Pole Canopy which works well with the Nevada 3 and can be bought for £ 19 ; an alternative is the Vango Large Sun Canopy .
the point is when they took all of the police off the streets crime went rampant , the gov made to many cutbacks , any body knows dispite the lies put out by official souses A POLICE MAN ON THE STREET IS A COLECTORS ITEM In fact a police officer in a car is a collectors item , unless they are cranking up the police funds with the speed traps / and random stops Lets face it if you want to know whats going on YOU HAVE TO BE THERE !
Derrick A derrick is a lifting device composed of one tower , or guyed mast such as a pole which is hinged freely at the bottom .
Derrick [ disambiguation ] A derrick is a lifting device , especially in an oil field .
Derrick A derrick is a lofty , portable , temporary , crane-like structure consisting of a single post or pole , supported by stays and guys , to which a boom with a pulley or pulleys is attached , used in loading and unloading vessels , etc. They were invented in 1857 by Bishop for raising sunken vessels and name ...
" But if the woman identified as a suspect was the same person on the DNA database then I think they 'd have no choice but to send it back to the appeal court .
I think if the DNA from the crime scene had come back as a man 's the case would have been referred in a second .
For someone who has no work , no future ; no hope , a job is a job .
Idol An idol is an image or other material object representing a deity to which religious worship is addressed or any person or thing regarded with blind admiration , adoration , or devotion .
Being bitten by a vampire or drinking the blood of a vampire is the most common way .
And a third is an old-fashioned , attention-grabbing theatricality .
Generally , I lower barriers when the next signal in front of a train is the last green signal before the crossing - this means they 're down before the train passes the yellow signal , so the train wo n't lose too much , if any , speed .
Sometimes , fifty people bellowing in triumph at a telly is the last thing in the world you want .
Just maybe thinking of the weight and 13 the rapidity of it 14 Q. What sort of a weapon is an AK 47 ?
Such a conclusion is the indisputable consensus of the community of scientists actively involved in the research of climate variability and its causes .
The first was that a person being an expert in humor and feminism was like a person being an expert in oysters and accordions ; I concluded that here was a terrific opportunity to plumb important sociological verities by humiliating some hapless , unfunny girl academic .
A street is a street ; 12 a derelict building is a derelict building ; a rioting 13 crowd is the same , no matter where you are in the United 14 Kingdom .
A statement is a statement , it is a blank piece of 18 paper .
Research proves that the most effective way to learn a language is the way you learned English - by listening and then practising what you hear .
A win is a win and three points but come on SAF take a look at the team selection last night not one of your better days Giggs for Scholes was a no no !
A cookie is a biscuit if you are an American .
A biscuit is a cookie if you are British .
Something like a scone is a biscuit if you come from the left-hand side of the Pond .
These are trendy : one bite of anything on a stick is the way to nibble these days .
A tagine is the celebrated stew of the region but it 's also the name for the vessel in which that stew is cooked .
A kefta is a meatball , and we all know what a tagine looks like .
Pottering 's support for such a body is the first time a political figure has shown real interest in taking concrete steps towards achieving the idea .
A Speak-Out is a fun event where you get to say what you think and what you think should be changed .
And bear in mind that a direct-vent is the best type to have , both in terms of energy efficiency and safety .
Presenting Islam as a harai is a great misreading of the Da ' wah .
Just like the old saying about a weed being a wild flower growing where it is not wanted , what we choose to label " pest " often comes down to our own point of view .
I 'd recommend 45 minutes of work time to 15 minutes ' procrastination , because after 45 minutes your attention-span starts to lag and taking a break is a good idea to keep you sharp and focussed .
An entry on 16th September 1707 , records that Captain Edward Evelyn paid Archbald [ Archibald ] Cash the ' odd groats ' ( a groat being a 4 d piece ) due to him in Ireland from ' ye 12th December to ye 28th April ' and his six weeks pay due to him at sea for which he received 19 / - in full of all his demands to the day he landed in Lisbon .
The name ' Spong ' or ' Sponge ' comes from the Middle English word spong , referring to ' the dweller by the narrow strip of land ' , a spong being a unit of land under the manorial system , generally the width that a strong man could just leap across .
A mask is a must if you 're painting , or creating fumes of some kind , or might end up breathing in dust .
In many cases - especially when working with legacy materials - describing the gaps to a learner is the most appropriate adjustment , allowing the learner to ask questions for clarification where needed .
Southerton , D. ( 2001 ) ' Ordinary and Distinctive Kitchens ; or a kitchen is a kitchen is a kitchen ' .
The demesne lands of a manor were the lands belonging to a mansion or manor house retained by the feudal lord for his own use .
With Henry Tingley as a stockman in both censuses , the Farm was probably dealing in cattle and possibly sheep for market , as a stockman is a man experienced in driving stock .
A carter was a person who generally drove a horse that pulled a two-wheeled vehicle for transporting goods , whereas a waggoner was a man who drove several horses that pulled a four-wheeled vehicle with a rectangular body for transporting heavy loads .
Costs - the costs involved in making and marketing a product are a key factor in the decisions the designer makes during development .
The most common cause of a meltdown is an emotional response to stress or overstimulation .
A brand is a set of values .
Hanging dead from a stirrup was a young servant lad named Benjamin Lowey who was about 15 years of age and who had been dragged along the ground , for some distance to cause his death .
An issue is the importance of having the same two individuals as chair and vice-chair of both bodies , or vice versa .
It is further important to note that the ability of an individual to control a risk is a feature of its acceptability , and more " experts " telling everyone that they should eat GM food will rightly be rejected .
A charge is any liability that is recorded on an SA record and payable by the taxpayer , including interest .
An amount is a Round Sum if it is divisible by 100 , 120 , 250 or 500 without remainder .
A pub is the perfect place to get a debate going , but not where people would normally expect to encounter ' science ' .
" That moment of standing on top of a mountain is both ephemeral and a bit meaningless , " he admits .
The whole adventure made me realize that " creative directing " is about as much fun as any self-proclaimed fashionista could hope for and if anyone ever asks me to head up a label without having to so much as pick up a needle and thread , I know now that my answer without skipping a heartbeat is a big fat yes .
Every bit of a palm is an investment .
Money spent on resolving what 's making your life a misery is an investment in yourself and will result in a happier and healthier life .
The worry , bearing in mind the amount of the cuts with which local authorities are still tussling , is that a fine is a minimum lump sum of € 9.6 million , according to the impact assessment , plus daily fines , and we have only those raw figures .
The more individualistic a society is the more the threat to family institution .
The problem is that attacking someone for taking a holiday is a bit like attacking holidays themselves .
If an individual is a member of a partnership in a particular year but they were not identified as such until after the daily penalty has been charged on the partnership , you will need to apply the penalty clerically .
I was recently corrected by a business friend who told me that a telephone is a " customer interface device " !
A vet is a good source of info also .
Another webzine that has remained out of commission for a while is The Golden Boot , " the thinking person 's football webzine writ­ten by thinking people " .
An image of a whiteboard is a much quicker and less formal way of recording decisions and designs agreed in a meeting .
Here is a list of 20 reasons why a website is an important asset for any business .
Properly understood , a covenant is an expression of mutual generosity - indeed , ' generous love ' , to borrow the title of the excellent document on Inter-Faith issues which was discussed yesterday .
However no matter how much we try , we cannot fully protect them , in fact the more protected a child is the more likely they are to inwardly focus on their ' perceived ' inabilities / inadequacies .
( A program is an array , and the program counter steps along it . ) This allows " load " instructions to contain their own literals , and more usefully it allows the " infinity " instruction to contain its own instruction substream .
The sending of a message is a system call , and when my process executes that system call the OS responds by running an " infinity " instruction in which it calls the other process 's message handler .
A heart is the symbol for love in many cultures , but Jesus is not talking here about emotional love .
You can see for yourself how many UK farmers now buy double-cab pick-ups when once the only vehicle you were likely to see in a farmyard apart from a tractor was a Land Rover .
A drawback is the ears , which merge .
Keeping a portfolio is an ideal way of stimulating this sort of reflection .
The area surrounding the park was not developed with housing until the middle years of the 20th century , and the loss of the lake as an attraction was a major blow to its popularity , but there was a revival in its fortunes in the post war period when a paddling pool and new sports facilities were introduced to serve the new housing which had grown up around the park .
being a minority is an advantage because the opponent has to adjust .
The love of a man for a maid is a very strange thing ; but it is not more strange than the love of a man for his ship .
If you 're fishing on clean gravel , perhaps over lots of bait then a low pop up with counter weight only a few mm from the hook and over weighted so that it sinks at the same rate as a freebie is a good starting point .
" With the world on the brink of meltdown , what you need in a car is a hero .
Apart from the obvious concerns with regard hepatitis , a tattoo is an open wound , particularly susceptible to infection , particularly when undergoing PRMC or Recruit Training .
Researchers say that 45 p per MP 3 download would be much more attractive to file-sharers , while five pounds a month was an attractive figure for an unlimited track subscription service .
By the way , I love what she has to say about commas , " a cat has claws on the end of it 's paws , but a comma is a pause at the end of a clause .
A basin with a pedestal is the traditional option in many UK homes .
Selecting a basin with a pedestal is an affordable option for people .
While an endoscopy is the traditional method of detecting the presence of H.pyl ori , the distribution of the organism is patchy within the gut lining and the bacteria can be missed .
A deponent is a person who gives evidence by affidavit or affirmation .
The jurat of an affidavit is a statement set out at the end of the document which authenticates the affidavit .
A winner at that point , welcome as it would have been for Dockers , would have been a little unfair on Borough and a draw was a fair result , though given the level of performance of both sides , they will both need to do a great deal more if they are to feature in the promotion shake-up .
The home solar panels that come with a guarantee are the best choice .
A starter motor wo n't leave much change from £ 300 , whilst a headlamp is the thick end of £ 700 .
GROWTH in a business is a positive sign but can cause issues when accompanied by a corresponding increase in the workforce .
Four hundred seemingly fit young people a year is a shocking statistic but perhaps it does n't have the same impact unless you have a personal experience of losing someone in this way .
A crate is a tool , and when used properly , is a very effective tool .
When used in conjuction with proper , patient and consistent methods , a crate is a great help .
: : : : : : : : Apparently , from your post , in the U.K. a bachelorette is a gathering rather than a person .
we will offer you the very best service that we can , we understand that the purchase of a car is a big event , & we will be upfront & honest with you .
We definitely remember our father Frederick 's story about his grandfather being the Royal Bargeman , and an uncle being an explorer in Africa who got eaten by a lion , and the uncle that was a military band leader , and how you had to play every instrument in the band before becoming band leader .
A metaphor is a figure of speech describing an abstract concept in concrete terms or something complicated in simple terms ie : they are queued up like soldiers waiting to charge into battle .
Lorna 's letter written about choosing food from a menu was a recipe for success with its final twist revealing the menu itself was the narrator .
A follow-spot is a nice detail if you have one , but is not a necessity .
B.T.W. a carman was the " lorry driver " of the horse and cart age , and a master carman may well have had a fleet of horses and carts ( with drivers ) .
A gazebo is a small , open structure with wooden floor , a fence around the edge and a roof on top .
To cvs : A source is a source , of course , of course , unless of course the source is Mr .
Customers expect a website A few years ago a website was a luxury , now it is a necessity that demonstrates your professionalism .
4 times a week is a lot !
I can accept that a fact is an indisputable truth but then truth like time appears to be in its own definition .
His example of a sign is the liveried servant he once saw in Modena leading two jackals on a leash .
There was a time , not long ago , when the closest I could come to a bellflower was a bluebell , and I could n't have said if a verbena was like a rose or a daisy .
In Italian a guscio is any type of shell , husk or outer casing : bag , tree-bark , egg-shell , husk , apparel , ship 's hull .
A rèdola is a gravelled garden walk , hardly what one would expect to find in a ditch : another example of subtle and decorative irony .
The first sequel 's final foray was so well put together , ensuring choice was directly responsible for the action that followed , that replacing such well-set ideas with what is more of a gimmick is a shame .
A highlight was the closing address by Gosta Esping-Andersen on ' The Welfare State as Social Investment ' .
• 55 % of education professionals ( careers advisors , teachers , tutors and lecturers ) believe a degree is the minimum qualification required for a career in engineering , and are apparently unaware of apprenticeships .
The land surrounding a pond is an important component of the habitat .
She has 2 weeks of no showers , which for a kid is a bonus !
Never let the fact that a record was a hit put you off from what is a real quality track .
It 's a cut-throat world on Wall Street , and presumably a quarter of an hour is all Lewis had to spare for commode-loving ex-Merrill boss , John Thain .
What a contrast is the hot spot , as Linda calls it .
pH value The pH value of a material is an indication of how acidic or alkaline it is , measured using the pH scale from 1 to 14 .
The stock springs on a sport are a little on the soft side for my tastes however the damping is adequate .
I said when I posted about Sam 's that a terrine is a very good way of testing the intentions of a kitchen , particularly as they seem to be on every single menu at the moment .
Insulin pumps worn externally 24 hours a day are a more sophisticated way of giving insulin .
Investment funds - A fund is a form of collective investment that lets you invest indirectly in company shares or other types of investments .
Consequently the reproduction of a story is a more usual type of work , at this stage , than is the writing of a precis .
It 's not a fluke being this far clear .
To call Carroll a flop is the comment of someone who knows nothing about football .
The lack of a camera is the biggest complaint people have about the iPad .
Within the Recreation Ground there are attractive areas of planting and a pond with a fountain is a central feature .
A mate is the Bridge Master there and has promised me a walk out on to the hangers someday .
yes I think a memorial is a good thing .
LEST WE FORGET , a memorial is a good idea .
A recent experience of our emergency services looking after a substantial number of people at an event was the diamond jubilee weekend , when the communications network helped the emergency services to work together effectively .
always said to folk , the day the internet gets policed more in such a way is the day it all goes tits up !
Then we need a rental model like the one proposed here ( and 1.99 a week is a fair price , IMO ) , with reliable companies offering them .
A. There was no visit slip , no. Q. And so the only place you could have made a note was the Lloyd George card , was n't it ?
Q. The only explanation for the fact you did not call an ambulance is the fact that you had killed that lady , is n't it ?
Q. The more difficult a family were the more abrupt and difficult you were , were n't you ?
A control is any action or procedure performed by management to increase the likelihood of activities achieving their objectives .
The question whether the defendant adduces sufficient evidence to raise an issue to be left to a jury is a matter for the judge .
It may also be that the length of time spent in legal education as a whole is a factor which is being taken into account in current discussions on the future of legal education in Germany .
Though this has been reduced by 20 years or so , it is still the case that access to a chair is the only means whereby a permanent university post can be achieved .
A nation is the same people living in the same place .
A. Definitely he was trying to say that the reason why mum had had a stroke was the blood pressure and a vessel would have just exploded in her head .
A copyright is a means of protection of the work and its author to allow him to profit from his creation .
The maximum penalty attaching to a crime is another indicator of whether it is to be read as requiring proof of mens rea : " The more serious the offence , the greater is the weight to be attached to the presumption , because the more severe is the punishment and the graver the stigma which accompany a conviction .
Cramming God into a nutshell is a laudable pursuit if one can sell books and make a living from it .
Sometimes a line is a single word .
A parser is a tool to help an application read an XML file .
How to find out if a node is the first of its kind after a sort 5 .
A mammal is a creature whose female of the species has mammary glands , i.e. suckles its young .
Unlike the section 1 offence of hunting with dogs , being present at what is a hare coursing event , even as a spectator is an offence under the Act .
A simple-page-master is a master that is used to define the regions of a page into which content is flowed .
A line-area is a special kind of block-area whose children are all inline-areas .
A glyph-area is a special kind of inline-area which has no child areas , and has a single glyph image as its content .
A color is a set of values used to identify a particular color from a color space .
The children of a flow are a sequence of block-level flow objects .
Traditionally , a widow is a line or two of text which breaks to another page , either leading or trailing the body of a paragraph ; an orphan is an individual word or hyphenated part which breaks to a line by itself , at a page break or not .
The offence of exhumation without a licence is a summary one only , committed on each occasion that a body , or its remains , are removed .
No one is claiming that BT is funding all of an area , assuming an area is a town or county .
An SLA is a contract that specifies standards , timings and payments for the supply along with penalties for missing targets .
A tutor is a paid professional who provides academic instruction , usually to students who are struggling in a particular subject .
If a placement is a compulsory part of your award , you will normally be expected to pass the placement before you can progress onto the next level of your award .
Cantor says that a set is a collection of arbitrary well-defined and well-distinguished objects .
A cookie is a small data file that stores information about your internet browsing .
As we enter the second half of the transfer window having failed to bring in any strikers , there is now a faction within the fans who believe that maybe bringing in a striker is a bad idea , as we only ever play one anyway .
By contrast the cost of a return bus trip from the centre of Edinburgh is £ 6 return , with a taxi being a great deal more - and again involving two car journeys .
I wrote a few lines in reply to the effect that my understanding was that the virtue of a Mac is that it 's user friendly , and to send a communication that ended in such a way was neither user friendly , nor friendly in any other way .
A highlight was The Red Poppy which is rarely seen in the UK , and Darya Khokhlova 's darting attack and contrasting melting into her partner Vladislav Lantratov , as the ship 's captain that Chinese dancer Tao-Hoa falls in love with , symbolised the power of the poppy , in two extracts shown tonight - Golden Fingers variation and the Adagio from Act 11 .
A cookie is a small file of letters and numbers which we put on your computer if you agree .
A meetup is a real-life meeting between people with similar interests , and the service is free to use ( although meeting organisers have to pay a small fee ) .
A doppleganger is a person who changes into another person and takes their place .
In some cases using a pushchair is the only option you have and it does n't help if some ignoramus in the House of Commons starts playing up to the national hobby horse of britain , obesity , and saying it is caused by keeping a child in a pushchair for too long .
I liked the hubcap image so much that I did n't stop to worry too much about " sedan " - to me , a sedan is an 18th- century chair carried along by two men .
Dr Bob Adak , an HPA expert in gastrointestinal disease , said : ' Visiting a farm is a very enjoyable experience for both children and adults alike , but it 's important to remember that contact with farm animals carries a risk of infection because of the bacteria - or germs - they naturally carry .
A regular shave and a haircut are a must .
For those who like to wear low waisted trousers and jeans , flashing a thong is a turn off rather than a turn on , so please get with the programme .
Artefacts from Tudor Times An artefact is a special history name for objects that are from another period in time .
I could take my pigs in and show them what a healthy pig looks like , and how to tell whether a piggie is a sick one or not .
I think 3 hrs a day is a small price to pay , I mean , after all ppl were without it for days last week .
( 4 ) Premises are not within subsection ( 1 ) ( b ) if letting them as a dwelling is a breach of a lease superior to lease B.
( 5 ) Premises are not within subsection ( 1 ) ( c ) if occupying them as a dwelling is a breach of lease A or a lease superior to lease A.
Good luck a job is a job and at the moment its good to have one .
Providing one of the fastest growing specialities in the world of cosmetology , a manicurist is a person who cleans , trims , and polishes fingernails for a living , as well as offering clients pedicures , which involve the same process to beautify toenails .
" For a word is a better thing than a gift , " [ 2012 ] and " answer the poor man peaceably with meekness .
Wealth of Nations ( WoN ) in a way is the virtue of the statesman .
The Census A census is an official count of the number of people in a region .
That in a nutshell is the debate .
He apparently thought wearing nothing , but boxer shorts and a bag was a great disguise , but employees identified him as a co-worker .
That such an explanation is a justification does not mean it is the only justification .
Given that Texas executes other murderers , if one sincerely believes that a fetus is a human being and that abortion is murder , executing abortionists for coldblooded , premeditated murder-for-hire makes sense .
But if everyone were convinced that an embryo was a person , reproductive clinics would be heavily regulated to ensure that no embryos were produced that were not going to be implanted , and of course both embryonic stem cell research and any contraceptive that makes the uterine wall inhospitable to an embryo 's attachment would be illegal .
If a woman is the only person who can keep a fetus alive , and she never has wanted to , then she should be able to abort it .
First of all , there is a fundamental area of disagreement between us : you believe that an abortion is a medical procedure .
Asking a question is an easy way to give a piece structure , conflict and drama .
For wakeboarders , a trampoline is a must !
The greatest advantage to using a trampoline is the sense of orientation it gives you in the air .
Oscar Wilde A cynic is a man who knows the price of everything , and the value of nothing .
Money spent for a fruitless experience with a healer is another negative factor .
A serving is an 8 - ounce glass of low-fat milk , one cup of yogurt or 1.5 ounces of cheese .
But injured workers have a right to a full and fair hearing of their claims , and denial of such a hearing is a denial of due process .
The archives as a fortress is an observable structural property , as is the archives as a physical accumulation of records .
Hello , if you bother to read the law it was stated about 1898 or so that a corporation was a person .
In children , obviously , such a conviction is a matter of authority .
A bill is a legislative proposal before Congress .
( The explosion of a shell is a chemical reaction , but hey , you know what they mean ) .
When people ' um ' and ' err ' it 's because they 're afraid someone else will fill the silence if they pause for thought but a presentation is the one time you do n't have to worry about this .
Because a human is a born in dual citizen , we are able to looking at both world where infrastructure in simultaneous order .
An image is an array , or a matrix , of square pixels ( picture elements ) arranged in columns and rows .
@ muon counter " Linear regression is a model " To me a model is an attempt to build a system that will re-create the temperature record albeit with some adjustable parameters .
The style of learning that focus on teacher lecturing students in a classroom is an ancient one .
Thus , a field is an instrument , because it is a means to the attainment of corn .
Owen further understands , as too many homeowners do not , that a house is an ongoing project that will never , ever , be completed .
Everybody knows that a house is a bottomless pit down which one pours stupendous amounts of money , but not so many grasp the sheer endlessness of home improvement .
Even a dance is a speech in movement .
For example , the common " dotted " figure of long+short within a beat is the equivalent of a two-syllable word going ACROSS the beat .
- A whisper and a shout are both strong gestures : they are surprising .
Failure to comply with such a requirement was a criminal offence , punishable by a fine of not more than £ 1,000 , mandatory endorsement of the offender 's licence and , at the court 's discretion , disqualification from driving .
I get the feeling that people who believe that randomness takes all the planning out of a game are the type that plan turn 5 during deployment .
A co-developer is an expert company , which works with a site owner or energy user to realise a renewable energy project .
" We think 30 minutes a session is a way forward .
Duped consumers not only blow money on bogus products , but they may also forgo legitimate treatments while suffering under the impression that a supplement is the magic bullet against their problems .
You can never trule prove such a dream is a premonition .
At the moment , it is not only visible , but what I call clunky : if you think about it objectively , most of the time using a computer is a ridiculously complicated experience , apart from the odd piece of software that shines like a beacon in the darkness such as , from what I 've seen , Apple 's i-Life .
The issue of mise-en-scène and textual analysis in terms of the importance of creating meaning within a film is a very large topic .
" The Regulations do not expressly impose upon either the local planning authority or the Secretary of State a general obligation to consider whether an application is a Schedule 2 application or not .
But , since the question of whether an application is a Schedule 2 application is primarily entrusted by regulation 2 ( 2 ) to the Secretary of State , it is not difficult , in order to make regulation 4 ( 2 ) effective , to imply into that regulation an obligation upon the Secretary of State to consider the matter ...
An example is the coordination among government agencies ( their data dissemination propaganda ) and the Federal Reserve 's contorted views as expressed through the country 's news collection agencies .
A haori is a jacket that is worn over a kimono .
Why pay lifestyle goods prices for an OS in an age when an OS is a commodity ?
Aug .01 Classic axels ( or what I thought were axels ... apparently what I thought was an axel was a flat spin done with the wrong hand ?!? ) on the left edge of the window .
The Bill is not going to tweak the thresholds that define whether a project is an NSIP or not .
A solicitor is a good idea simply because this amount cannot be " heard " in the Small Claims Court - it will have to go on the " Fast Track " Court .
However , a dealership is the most expensive place to buy a new car and will offer you only a fraction of what you can get by selling your old car privately .
A phone is a phone no matter how you look at it and it works , so I would be recieveing nothing for something that works , even this model is going on Ebay for at least something , even 99 p , and here 's the wisdom words " It pays to shop around " mazumaripoff dot com .
A pedalo is another must , so relaxing , and again you can go out to sea a long way .
There is little doubt that there are many keen purchasers in the market looking for quality day nurseries across the country but as lending is tough we have found that using a broker is the best way in securing the best rate possible on funding .
On one hand having a family is a great cover for a serial killer .
Newest Review : ... buying something from a bootsale is the sale as off Ebay , genuine people who simply are getting rid of items they no longer need .
When you take the view from complexity-theory ( chaos-theory ) a hex is a strange attractor and the lines give bifircations ( forking-moments ) .
think about it a cast ( note spelling - queen , worker , drone = castes ) is just a swarm headed by a virgin queen a swarm is a means of reproducing the super organism .
A fail is a fail .
Appraisal of your work An appraisal is a document about the estimated value and other attributes of a quilt .
Typing commands into a shell is a new idea for Unix-based OSs , right ?
All the old school drivers are just as deserving , winning a championship is a bewildering combination of factors .
6 , trying to pack a weekend of camping in a mini is a bit of a squeeze ..
The sign of a cylinder or rectangular seal suspended on a cord was the earliest hieroglyphic sign used for the title " Keeper of the Royal Seal .
The presumed murder of an individual was the final proof of all for some that Freemasonry was without law and would ultimately control them .
( a ) A Directive is an official action which requires a person to take or refrain from taking certain actions in accordance with its provisions .
A person is a leader of a dog fighting network if he conspires with others in a scheme or course of conduct to unlawfully engage in dog fighting , as defined in section 1 of P.L. , c .
You 're a bottom-feeder , and the only thing sadder and more irritating than a bottom-feeder is a ignorant bottom-feeder with a smug attitude .
The amount they pay for their child to go to school for a month is the same as the cost of a bottle of beer in one of the top-class hotels in Nairobi that some of the consultants we are talking about might stay at .
A tissue is a complex system of cells interacting : exchanging signals , exerting physical forces on one another , and otherwise shaping their environment .
We do not know exactly when the wheel was invented , but the first known depiction of a wheel is a Sumerian pictograph from 3,500 BCE .
Four simple reasons for your right decision in choosing us : 1 ) quality guaranteed : our skilful workers and strict QC system ; 2 ) competitive pricing : our town is the manufacturing base for hotel supplies , we have lower cost in spa slippers raw materials and processing cost ; 3 ) on-time delivery : A promise is a promise .
Captain Carter 's wormhole theory states that a wormhole is an interdimensional conduit , and can only form between two open gates .
A mammogram is an X-ray exam of the breast .
A plug-in is a small piece of software that Web visitors need to install on their computer in order to run some virtual reality applications .
A book is a puzzle ; any change to a piece affects the whole in unpredictable ways .
A record is a data structure that contains the data to be processed .
The right of ingress and egress by way of a street is a property right of which an abutting property owner cannot be deprived without compensation .
An omen is a sign whose resolution is in future acts of inquiry and observation .
A symptom is a sign whose action is ongoing in the present .
A clue is a sign which indicates some past state of affairs .
I guess it 's easy to think a whistleblower is a person who reveals someone else 's guilty secrets , not ones own .
In discussing the difference between a dialect and a language , he quoted the saying , " a language is a dialect with an army .
( a ) Some scholars believe that the saying is an expansion of a quote from Antoine Meillet , to the effect that a language is a dialect with an army .
Avrohom Novershtern ( Jerusalem ) found for me the source of Max Weinreich 's saying that _ A shprakh iz a diyalekt mit an armey un a flot _ [ ' A language is a dialect with an army and a navy .
That you are able to see yourself as an individual is a big part of your Western Identity .
Dynamics on a harpsichord are a relative thing ( the score actually does n't indicate any ) , but articulation is another matter , and Tom 's attention to things like the staccato-against-legato patterns in " Flying Lessons " brings Angels and Watermarks vigorously to life .
[ Laughs ] A film without an audience is a dead movie .
Arresting me for possessing an herb is an infringement on me .
Thus , when someone claims that a person is an atheist because they " deny the existence of God , " we can start to see some of the errors and misunderstandings that statement involves .
The rotational speed of a bullet is an interesting topic .
A year is a long time 12 long months 365 event-filled days .
The shuffle 's lack of a display is no big deal for me considering I use it mainly for jogging when I obviously woudlnt be bothered with fiddling around with the songs .
You do n't exactly picture a Blitzkrieg of Panzers blasting through the hedgerows of Normandy or anything , mostly because trying to drive a tank through a jungle is a logistical undertaking that borders on being retarded .
An invitee is a person who " rightfully come[s] upon the premises of another by invitation , express or implied , for some purpose which is beneficial to the owner .
Ethnicity is irrelevant ; a crime is a crime .
" The language of a statute is the most reliable evidence of its intent .
If you did not answer ( c ) , chances are , you probably also think $ 20 a pound is a lot to pay for mushrooms .
Of course , doing this in an emergency is a source of discomfort , as it involves abandoning the few certainties already legitimated both in a remote headquarters and the field , and acknowledging the risky contingent nature of emergency management .
Again , who is and is not a murderer is a legal interpretation .
Another key factor in the shape of the program and the project as a whole is the language it was written in : Lingo , the language within Macromedia Director - a program normally used for building multimedia products and presentations .
If you felt the need to make sure your thumb drive was empty and were concerned about someone recovering your data , would n't a hammer be a simpler option ?
1 A URL is the global address of documents and other resources on the World Wide Web .
If this election of a commander-in-chief be a part of the rights of men , why not of theirs ?
A cartwheel was a particular type of aerial manoeuvre .
What if a change was a very good idea ... it could also spread like wildfire .
A priest is a shepherd of souls .
You do n't live outside of the Universe , you are a part of it , as a part is an integral portion of the whole . .
Hospitality is with them as much a religious duty as it is with the Hindus ; and I fully indorse the opinion expressed by a Swedish lady , in a recent letter , where she says : " In my country the very fact that a person is a foreigner entitles him to double consideration , hospitality , and politeness .
" But getting nervous ( as in the lyrics of this song ) , I do n't do that anymore [ which is n't quite the truth , read the tour-diaries ... den Buck ] But I sweat a lot when playing , I never ever stand still , a show is a very intense thing for me .
A miracle is the hand of God acting within nature to produce an effect that neither man nor nature unaided could do on its own .
Save Project I think that the only information that you must save in a file are the geometry and the levels you 're working on , because everything else is not interesting ( meaning that it can be default next time you restart Stripes ) .
An alias is another email address that you can use to sign into those Microsoft devices .
Bobbo slowly walks forward and Dunder proclaims that Bobbo thinks a cockpit is a hole full of chickens .
In comparison , a nova is a star that explosively sheds its outer layers without destroying itself .
The logical positivists explored , with great precision and ingenuity , the idea that the meaning of a sentence is a procedure for determining the truth or falsity of that sentence .
But if the meaning of a sentence is an indicated proposition ( or perhaps a function from contexts to propositions ) , then one might say that the logical form " of " a sentence is its semantic structure-i .
A ghost is a guilty conscience .
, " but the existence of such a being is another question entirely .
Commonly a spheroid is an ellipsoid - generated by revolving an ellipse around one of its axes .
Analyze This did that pretty well : the premise was interesting having De Niro and his mobster character history in a comedy was a novelty .
I can see this going either way , but I think a disappointment is a little more likely than a success .
" Hounds IN FULL CRY I like , " said she : ( Oh how I longed to snub her ! ) " Of fish , a whale 's the one for me , IT IS SO FULL OF BLUBBER !
Measuring distances on the surface of a table is an old and by now well-understood exercise , but there is no obvious familiar notion of " distance " in space and time drawn together .
He said a telephone was a nuisance and disturbing to him .
After all , a crown is a suitable metaphor for either a M. L. King , or a R. D. King , or any other King .
If a neighbour is a nurse they could offer to look after the people in the local area or road for one night a week for free .
A crisp is a potato sliced far too thinly for its own good , rinsed of starch , then put in the fryer , where it absorbs so much fat that it accounts for about 40 % of its being .
Although I lived in the Wicker area until I was almost 24 , I only ever went into the Station Hotel ( a relative was the licensee at the time ) and even then they would n't serve me anything but soft drinks .
But as others have mentioned , where on Fabian Way cross bridges are required and pedestrian crossings at traffic lights , they are there , but the rest of the road where pedestrians feel it a shortcut , yes they should n't cross but they do when a journey is wet , cold and windy then a shortcut is the answer .
Training as part of a group is a key way to stay motivated .
The only thing that livens it up a bit are the protests .
Writing a sequel to a best-seller is a totally different matter .
Maybe a vxr is a easier option ???
An example is the new cholesterol-lowering margarines that are fortified with plant sterols that block cholesterol absorption .
Monstrance A monstrance is the vessel used in the Roman Catholic , Old Catholic , and Anglican churches to display the consecrated Eucharistic host , during Eucharistic adoration or Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament .
" The next stage is to diversify our debt and a bond is a possibility in that respect .
But how long I could share the man in my life with a ghost is a valid question .
The ideological kernel of a production is the seed which the director and all the other creative workers should bring into flower through their collective efforts and wisdom .
Overpowering a study is a bad idea , but so is underpowering a study .
A narcissist is a legend in his own mind .
I agree that changing the class of an element is the most suitable way to change its style , however , I often change things like visibility ( / display ) using styles , and in some cases I think that 's the best solution ( it really does n't need its own class ) .
But related statutes make clear that the key to defining an employee is the concept that an employee is in the service of another in the course of a trade , business , profession or occupation of an employer .
When first confronted with the issue in 1986 , the Commission concluded a limp was a disfigurement , but reversed course in 1994 .
§ 102.08 ( b ) for deciding independent contractor status [ , ] ... the Kress Packing test continues to have vitality in determining whether a person is an employee under Wis .
PETER BROOK : The particular gift of an actor is a certain link between the pure imagination and the body itself .
The question is how such an endlessly qualified wishlist can ever materalise around a clear proposal : can an organisation be both hierarchical and horizontal ?
The dealers ' union contends Harrah 's violated labor law by refusing to bargain in good faith , but the difficulty in proving such an allegation is the very reason many unions are never able to obtain a labor contract , Waddoups says .
A wake is a celebration after someone 's death , and this is certainly a celebration of McLuhan .
A memristor is a two-terminal device whose resistance depends on the magnitude and polarity of the voltage applied to it and the length of time that voltage has been applied .
But a memristor is a pipe that changes diameter with the amount and direction of water that flows through it .
" The Supreme Court has always upheld the principle that you have the right to speak anonymously - that the decision to identify yourself as a speaker is an aspect of speech itself , " said Lee Tien , a senior staff attorney with the Electronic Frontier Foundation .
A gestalt is a completed unit of human experience .
To serve as director of a library was a great honor .
" Our civil code , like the French code , lays down that ' a minor is a person of either sex who has not yet attained the full age of 21 years .
The simplest situation for a geologist is a " layer cake " succession of sedimentary or extrusive igneous rock units arranged in nearly horizontal layers .
It depends upon the exact situation , and how much data are present to test hypotheses e.g. , could the range of a fossil be a bit different from what was thought previously , or could the boundary between two time periods be a slightly different numerical age ?
Such controllers ( 98 ) are commercially available and an example is a Klockner-Moeller model PS 4 -111 - DR 1 .
Check valve ( 122 ) is of conventional construction and an example is a ball check valve hashtagblank available from Granger Catalogue # 382 , 1992 .
A Frenchman or a Scotchman was a natural enemy : a Muscovite was a foreign devil : the relationship of a negro to the human race was far more distant than that of a gorilla is now admitted to be .
Even that slender consolation vanished later on before the renewed investigation of value made by Jevons , * 26 who demonstrated that the value of a commodity is a function of the quantity available , and may fall to zero when the supply outruns the demand so far as to make the final increment of the supply useless .
To me , going for a walk is the answer to all my problems .
You people are delusional if you think Iran having a nuke is a good thing , or that you can rationalize away a terrorist regime having WMD 's .
Here , the candidate for a vehicle is an image of a vehicle extracted as the result of the treatment including the difference between frames and the difference from the background .
With regard to FIDM , a levy is the actual taking of the financial asset to satisfy the debt .
In fact , Beshears expressly rejected the Strassburger decision without explanation , and instead merely " adhere[d] to its reasoning ... more recently in Burton ... that refusing to sign such an agreement is a quitting , and not with good cause attributable to the employer .
First , there is the familiar sense in which a person is an atheist .
Secondly , there is also a broader sense in which a person is an atheist if he rejects belief in God , regardless of whether his rejection is based on the view that belief in God is false .
An agnostic is a person who believes that something is inherently unknowable by the human mind .
Recognizing this child as an atheist is a major step in removing the moral stigma attached to atheism , because it forces the theist to either abandon his stereotypes of atheism or to extend them where they are patently absurd .
From the mere fact that a person is an atheist , one cannot infer that this person subscribes to any particular positive beliefs .
To me , being a reporter is the most exciting job there is .
A child is a treasure but when it is left in the dark or filth , it fails to bring the oomph to the parent or guardian .
An egg is an alternative for those nights when you want something home-cooked .
The NRA loves their tagline " The only thing that stops a bad guy with a gun is a good guy with a gun .
We must emphasize that this is not a volume for the English lay reader of the Bible , because the ( usually ) simple process of finding a place on a map is a daunting process .
We had over 30 entries and really appreciated the support this contest had , but a contest is a contest .
One of the very first things I learned as a journalist was an evident but often overlooked fact : A story needs characters .
A desert is no desert , if we are with Christ there .
A restaurant is a gathering place for the community .
Do n't really care how OU loses or who they lose to , I just know a loss is a good thing .
Others think that by the time a player is an upperclassman in college , it 's probably too late to change mechanics in a meaningful way .
If a person are a significant man , it will work a wonderful deal better than some Nike Max Airs .
A letter is a line that has curved back on itself to form the literality of the letter , making it a sign that has meaning because it can be distinguished from other signs .
A retainer is a fee paid to an attorney or other professional in advance , for services .
Adding a stairway is the next consideration .
( I have Gay family members ) but I think that the guy from Duck Dynasty 's comments about putting ones ' thingy ' in an anus rather than a vagina was a bit of a shock ... but after further pondering , it occurred ' to me , that that aspect of the whole situation , is never even brought up .
I believe a book is a tool to teach , but I often have a harder time learning from the more erudite business texts .
But checking a kick and ending a fight is a freak occurrence .
" Thanks to Walmart for telling inner-city Johnny across America that " a mind is a terrible thing to waste .
Our first cry as a baby was a bid for attention .
Johnny 's playboy Uncle Terry , portrayed credibly by Burns , tries to make the lad see the error in his ways , but a promise is a promise .
" A cell is a few nanograms in mass or smaller .
This bill imposes upon employers the responsibility of determining whether somebody who applies for a job is an American or not .
It 's a nasty catch that can be difficult to get around but an internship is a good way to do it .
Even if it is , and even if the creation of a singleton is the only way to forestall ultimate catastrophe , it is a separate question what policies it makes sense to promote in the here and now .
i need a haircut is the next entry in this blog .
The overwhelming value in a democracy is the activity of developing a point of view about who represents what matters to you most .
In the past , casting a vote was the only visible , persistent signal to send .
The Principle of Reality , which states that " the degree of power or reality embodied in a being are a ratio of the extensiveness of the differences the entity produces " , coupled with Latour 's Principle which states that " there is no transportation without translation " , tells a very different story .
The degree of power or reality embodied in a being are a ratio of the extensiveness of the differences the entity produces .
In other words , the more real an entity is the more difference that entity produces .
That being said I think that being in jail since June 27th over yelling at a telemarketer is a bit much .
I have employed , and continue to employ some of these obsolete words , and peeps merely think such a lexicon is a Gregorian ( Gunnian if you prefer ) fabrication .
I think one of the SUVs I saw on fire in a video was a Ford , not usually a luxury brand , but by no means would I ever try to stop someone from doing it , fuck that .
The truth is that building an organization is a team effort .
It was a gift from Egypt after a Frenchman was the one to discover the meaning of the Rosetta stone so Egyptian hieroglyphics could be interpreted .
Here they depended on me for a long time , and my bad health in voice for a year was a good thing as it made the others come forward .
The assumption is that because the tools of mathematics allow for no subjectivity , statistics eliminate subjectivity : a number is a number , independent of the observer , and the same set of data will produce the same statistical results no matter who analyzes the data .
High up on a shelf was a box of chocolates , but I realized those were stored with the other Christmas presents we would be giving each other later , so I could n't take those .
An example is the introduction to the discussion of love by the river , in which we are at first unaware that we are seeing Tokio 's camera view .
An expert is a man who has made all the mistakes which can be made in a very narrow field .
A similitude is the deep place within oneself that our innermost wants , needs , likes , and desires comes from , that place that you just ca n't really describe , but which is the driving force within us .
Also known as the hypocenter , the focus of an earthquake is the point on the fault plane where rupture began .
Also known as the focus , the hypocenter of an earthquake is the point on the fault plane where rupture began .
Lines connecting points at which the intensity for an earthquake is the same .
An emergency is an unplanned event that prevents you from providing care .
A sizer is a handy tool that resizes widgets when the user changes the size of the window by clicking and dragging a side or corner .
In essence , a mixin is a helper class that adds some type of functionality to the parent widget .
Generally a kitchen is a good place because of the heat and humidity the place generates .
A metapopulation is a population that occupies several geographically separated habitat patches .
What an instrument is the human voice !
Answer : A tsunami is a sea wave of local or distant origin that can be generated when the sea floor abruptly deforms and vertically displaces overlying water .
This is a kind of unusual technique for reducing the impact of the torture , but I find that feeding and hanging out with squirrels in a park is the single most " daily spiritually uplifting " experience I 've had since starting to look for ways to cope .
Generally the FIRST report of an incident is the most factual .
A pixel is an all or nothing device ; it does not contain any extra detail , just a shade that depends on the depth of colour or a grey scale which your hardware defines .
To Fax or Not to Fax : Sending a fax is a close second to sending a letter by post .
Often , the best future contributors to an organization are the people who have made a donation in the past .
Gassendi 's career as a priest is a crucial facet of his intellectual constitution : his writings reflect an unbending allegiance to Holy Scripture and Church teachings , though not necessarily in orthodox doctrinal lights .
A corpuscle is an aggregate of atomic elements .
Do n't let a disaster be a disaster twice by losing more than just your physical plant .
The history is , " A " stood for " allies " , because there was a time when being an ally was a pretty risky thing that some people did because they cared and thought it mattered , and just because we 're now living in the dramatically safer culture they helped create does n't mean we should lie about them and erase their contributions .
The moments I cherish most as a parent are those I see the true love and devotion my kids have for one another .
A link in the text field of an image is a far better way to get people to your content .
The lack of a spouse is a significant factor : 54 % of SSDI and 88 % of SSD recipients are not married .
A squeeze is the market price temporarily moving against its longer term direction , by a larger amount than would usually be expected , and then continuing moving in its longer term direction .
A cynic might suggest such a system is the manipulation of clever doctors .
Mounting a camera on a car is the desire of anyone wanting to do a traveling shot , but cost and quality are always issues .
The best tool for obtaining such a beam is a laser but its usage entails some difficulties .
A sample is a set of sampling locations where attributes of the species are measured to estimate its characteristics over the entire study area .
Random sampling - Random selection of sampling locations among a list is an easy-to-use procedure that is recommended when the aim of the sampling is to provide a picture of the situation across the study area .
While delineation of potential habitat for a species is a first step in risk mapping for Anopheles-borne species , forecasting seasonal events and variation in ( micro - ) habitat suitability and mosquito population is essential .
Buying a house is the single most expensive financial transaction most people will make in their entire lives , and you would be surprised how many of us just rush straight in to it .
A plugin is a software module that you " plug in " to WordPress to give your blog added functionality .
What we got as a result was a really insidious environment in which we do n't feel any shame for any overconsumption .
No doubt , owning a website is the fastest , simplest and cheapest means to get to a maximum number of individuals .
The drum sticks are the extensions of drummer 's hands like a brush is an extension of the painter 's hand .
" The Image-Maker " : the quotation is from Exodus 20:4 20:4 ; the whole poem alludes to Genesis 1:26 1:26 ; a superscription is something written on the surface of , on the outside of , or above something else ; an effigy is an image or representation of a person .
I believe the most important aspect of breastfeeding a toddler is the special relationship between child and his mother .
I think many trail angels do n't realize that feeding a hiker is a very ephemeral thing , but giving them a ride into town , helping them navigate a city or town , and making their town stops easier in any tiny way is a really huge thing , and much more helpful to their hike .
Being a mom is the world 's toughest job .
A seder is the Jewish ritual conducted as part of the observance of Passover .
A seal or a signature is a fundamental instrument through which a person acts in the world .
I do n't think it 's a problem being a woman in the media .
A cold is a mild illness caused by a respiratory virus that generally causes sneezing , a cough , a sore throat and a runny nose .
A ninth is another ex-member of the church , who declined to be named : ' When someone falls out with the bishop , families end up falling apart .
Economic migrants are noy asylum seekers , however , anyone who objects or raises a doubt is a racist ???
Loyalty to your party is admirable but blind loyalty is stupid , the past actions and constant denial by certain Lib Dems will ensure that the Lib Dems will for a generation be a fringe party , Just to clarify , the Lib Dems voted No to tuition fees locally .
Those few hours one weekend a year are a real bind .
A novel is a book of long narrative in literary prose .
For a boy who had left school at 14 and been put to work in a bicycle shop in Leamington , his birthplace , making a life as an artist was a huge challenge , especially as he had married as soon as he was demobbed , with few prospects .
How much of a risk was the operation ?
In my experience , the most important quality in a judge is the ability to make a decision and stick by it .
A fad is any form of behavior that develops among a large population and is collectively followed with enthusiasm for some period , generally as a result of the behavior 's being ...
Thermophilic ( heat-loving ) bacteria have thermostable ( heat-stable or heat-tolerant ) enzymes ; an example is the enzyme pullulanase in Clostridium thermohydrosulfuricum , which functions optimally at a temperature of 90 ° C / 194 ° F ( Lowe et al. , 1993 ) .
" A gift is the thing itself which he gives who bestows these necessaries , as money , food , drink , clothing , shelter , aid ; but the fruit is the good and right will of the giver .
Perhaps the most popular birds that we collected as a hobby were the wild pigeons .
Chasing after the competition into Facebook , Twitter and blogging without a plan is the Lemming approach .
Loosing a suit is a very kind thing to do because it makes it easier for the wearer to breathe and is often much more comfortable .
Oh , I do n't think a journal 's any use - - do you ?
The end of the time of Dhuhr is when the shadow of an object is the same length as that object in addition to the length of its shadow at noon .
The smallest acceptable amount for a dowry is a quarter of a dinar .
[ Or her agent since a guardian is a precondition for the validity of the contract - there is no disagreement about that with us - or with the permission of someone qualified , which means those who possess the preconditions of guardianship which are : being male , free , sane , adult , not in ihram , and not a unbeliever for a Muslim woman .
Iceland was a great place to visit and renting a car is a must .
" Such a person is the creature with the most knowledge of Allah .
Being prepared for an interview is the best way to avoid a negative outcome .
According to Margit Erb : " A reproduction is a photograph of a photograph .
Unfortunately , the question then shifts to whether an economy is a natural system that can be studied like we study physics or chemistry ( a posteriori , to your point ) .
Despite sizeable production , however , the region as a whole is a net oil importer and almost half of its oil imports come from the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) and Russia .
The De avibus is a moralized treatise on birds , in much the same way that a bestiary is a moralized treatise on animals .
The lack of a beard is an additional clue .
A brigade is a unit combined with various types of forces , including combat units , such as infantry , armoured and artillery units , combat support units and logistical support units .
A divorce is a very sensitive matter , brother operations to and rising costs , as well as bank balance .
" WebMD says that a bronchospasm is a narrowing of the airways , and a search for the word turns up a bunch of results about asthma .
For me , the two most important elements for a shootout are the character 's situation and what in this context I can reflect of the film 's theme .
An operation is a calculation based on some inputs .
A matrix is a single variable representing a spreadsheet of inputs or operations .
" We do n't need a state-run media because our media outlets volunteer for the task : once the US government decrees that a technique is no longer torture , US media outlets dutifully cease using the term , " Greenwald writes .
Boynton ( 2011 , p 789 ) reflected that an asset is any commodity that has an economic value which is owned by an individual or an organization .
Still , a notebook is a cumbersome thing .
A reception is a group of people who have come together against their will to meet people they did n't want to know while eating small portions of things they did n't want to eat .
The closest dwarfs have to a reception is a gathering , which are held whenever there is a general feeling that it 's really about time someone organised another gathering .
An assurance is a certification by an applicant , normally included with the application , indicating that the entity will abide by a particular requirement if awarded a federal grant .
An award is the provision of funds to carry out an approved program or project ( based on an approved application or progress report ) .
A carryover is an unobligated balance ( UOB ) of federal funds remaining at the end of any budget period that may be carried forward to another budget period to cover allowable costs of that budget period ( whether as an offset or additional authorization ) .
A grant is a financial assistance support mechanism providing money , property ( or other direct assistance in lieu of money ) , or both , to an eligible entity to carry out an approved project or activity that supports a public purpose .
A sub-recipient is an entity that receives a sub-award from a grant recipient or another sub-recipient under an award of financial assistance .
But such a view is both foolish and impious , since the other Scriptures testify against this interpretation and declare that , when we are somewhat more advanced , we shall be equal to the angels .57 The question is to be solved on the principle that when a predicate is applied to certain persons , it is not to be at once taken to apply to them alone .
The relatives wish , as the giving of a name is a thing not to be lightly disposed of , to call the child Zacharias , and are surprised that Elisabeth should want him to be called John .
Note that , as mentioned earlier , the election of a candidate is a good whose provision is a step function of the number of votes .
One commonly used scale neurologists use for describing how the symptoms of PD have progressed in a patient is the Hoehn and Yahr scale .
When Thomas Young ( 1773 -1829 ) showed that light created interference patterns and so could only consist of waves , and when James Clerk Maxwell ( 1831 -1879 ) generalized this into the theory of electromagnetic radiation , both assumed the ontological principle that , since a wave was the deformation of a medium , there would have to be a medium for light or electromagnetic radiation .
Now , it turned out ( from the Michelson-Morley experiment ) that the velocity of light in a vacuum was the same however it was measured , which made it look like any inertial reference frame was at rest with respect to the ether .
Yes , we could forget about ether when it came to providing a frame of reference for motion , but there was still the original consideration that " since a wave was the deformation of a medium , there would have to be a medium for light or electromagnetic radiation .
If , that is , a wave is a deformation of a medium .
Johnson points those small business owners he advises to a few simple tests to determine whether a worker is a contractor or employee .
One argument posits that sitting upon a chair is an act of faith , so even atheists have faith when they sit on a chair in , say , a home they are visiting for the first time .
A pond is a miniature cosmos .
A bridge is an intelligent connection wire between two network cards .
A firewall is an intelligent insulator .
The direct deposition of molecules directly onto a surface is the preferred method for patterning soft matter because materials are added to the surface in a constructive manner .
For the family : this man made a difference is this world .
The album as a whole is a kind of a liberation manifesto for the baritone saxophone , the Rodney Dangerfield of the sax family .
Building a community is a large part of the residence experience .
A concussion is an injury to the brain that is caused by a blow to the head or body that may result in improper brain functioning .
A key was the presence in the group of Emine Alijaj , R.N. , P.A. - C .
A businessman is a specialist in voluntary exchange , and his success is largely determined by how well he succeeds in serving others .
Another reason for the media 's portrayal of Ishi as a savage was the popular concept of " The White Man 's Burden .
An earth home is no more a cave , than a penthouse is an attic .
Some people understand that a talisman is an object that reminds a person to focus his own positive thinking in order to amplify his virtues , and that it has no powers on its own .
tangent , tangential - A tangent is a line , curve , or surface , touching but not intersecting another line , curve , or surface .
teleidoscope - A type of a kaleidoscope , a teleidoscope is a cylindrical optical instrument that is rotated so that when a person looks into it , the viewer sees a succession of radial designs produced by a carefully arranged set of mirrors reflecting constantly changing patterns made by mirrored images of a triangular section of whatever can bee seen through the other end of the instrument .
telescope , telescopic lens - A telescope is an optical device for viewing directly or photographically distant subjects by making them look larger and nearer .
FUSION is an experience-it is a process by which an individual and an organization engage in a mutualistic relationship .
Earthworks : the line of the pre -1902 enclosure is visible as a scarp bank , but inside this forming an oval is another scarp bank , probably the original ' llan ' enclosure which shows as a slightly elevated area .
The database concept which can embody the physical concept of a sensor is a " pattern " .
Thus one can tell if an object is a stub by asking for its type .
One of the great forces towards a change is the remarkable Meet The Composer program which puts composers in the middle of the working situation , the business of music , dealing with managements and constituencies , having to talk to them , to hear what they think , to respond to their ire .
That is , a woman of status or beauty is a prize to be won , and possessing such a woman is a victory over other male competitors as well as a useful resource for further struggles .
A nikuman is a Japanese meat bun made from flour dough and filled with ground pork or other ingredients and then steamed .
... and catching a bullfrog is no small feat .
% A conference is a gathering of important people who singly can do nothing but together can decide that nothing can be done .
" -- attributed to Ray Bradbury % A mathematician is a device for turning coffee into theorems .
-- C.A. Desoer , on the solution of non-linear circuits % A physicist is an atom 's way of knowing about atoms .
-- George Wald % A rope lying over the top of a fence is the same length on each side .
" -- Frederick Brooks , " The Mythical Man Month " % An authority is a person who can tell you more about something than you really care to know .
% An economist is a man who would marry Farrah Fawcett-Majors for her money .
-- Roy Santoro % If a camel is a horse designed by a committee , then a consensus forecast is a camel 's behind .
Sample A sample is a part of the population that is actually examined in order to gather information .
Therefore , the user continually adds the same character as a new entry to the database because the text field that allows the user to enter a character is the first available entry point to the data input process .
Just one at a time is the house rule , though .
Of dubious value to the book as a whole is the concentrated selection of examples from the Ranunculaceae and Cactaceae which , of course , are specialties of the author .
Try being a designer is this world with an ego maniac boss who wanted it done yesterday .
It 's great that so many on this board can go twice a year , but for many of us , once a year is all we can do , and for many others , it may only be once every few years ...
It is just on a whole other level from whether a character is a believable 6th- grader .
We speculated that an iPad was an ideal means to convey this information to patients and have them report their progress and problems to providers .
Great article and discussion , though I have to disagree with the notion that an application is an application because it deals with more specific user tasks than a content site .
Google : Black tail of a cow is a cow behind letters .
Treadmill A treadmill is the topper health insurance program for yourself .
Perhaps some may feel that being the chairperson of a session is a lofty appointment not subject to janitorial duties , but I would argue that five minutes of preparation might enhance everyone 's presentations .
( Just because a diagram is the only way for the author to understand something does n't guarantee it 's the best way to explain it to someone else ) .
But the claim that the existence of continua blocks the notion that the universe is a simulation is a fairly precise statement of logic , mathematics and physics .
In my previous post I hinted at the idea that the cobind operation for a comonad was a bit like an operation on a SIMD computer that allows every processor to get access to information local to every other processor .
A cookie is a small data file that contains a unique identification number that a website places on your hard drive when you visit a website .
Somehow as Christians , admitting that we have a problem is the first challenge .
Facing such an offense is the task at hand for the Vikings defense this week , as Drew Brees and the high-scoring Saints offense are bringing their show to Mall of America Field on Sunday .
I think a book is a conversation between a writer and a reader .
Compressed into a fraction of a second was the shrill , expanding screech of the approaching round and the explosion that rocked the hilltop .
I suspect that a tree is a reasonable * model * for discussions - we just need to find a great way to present it .
( An exception is this story about the look for a new obbudsman in light of Jeffrey Dvorkin 's departure .
I am working on a documentary were a girl of 17 was forced to have sex with her aunt 's lover .
A guy named olle on the IRC channel once said : A component is a sharable little " controllerette " .
The Board concluded that when treatment effects of a drug are both substantial in restoring health and sustained over a very long period , at least 30 years , the Committee should apply a rate of 1.5 per cent for health effects and 3.5 per cent for costs rather than the normal 3.5 per cent for both costs and benefits .
Twenty days pass and he still is n't back and Mick and Alan are starving , but a promise is a promise .
Another five days and he still is n't back , but a promise is a promise .
When the occupier of a property is a charity-for example , in the case of lifeboat stations-and might also see large increases , that occupier is protected by a mandatory 80 per cent .
So how anyone can take seriously a charge of theft of a swarm is a mystery .
They seem to last for years so a set is a good buy .
A car is a very simple machine and does n't need to be complex at all .
What benefit to a tenant is this going to have ?
Fridge sizes are measured in litres , the capacity of a fridge is a good indication of the amount you 'll be able to store inside it - so make sure you check this before you buy .
A firewall is another invaluable resource that should be used in conjunction with a spyware prevention and removal program .
That is , they claimed a family is any group of people related or unrelated living together who consider themselves a family .
The OABA and its members strongly oppose PETA 's idea that " a pig is a dog is a rat is a child , " and feel that such a proposition diminishes the notion of humankind in its capacity to take full responsibility for stewardship over the animal world .
It took Dolores six months to get free of her feelings for Steve , her sense that abandoning a marriage was an admission of failure .
Maybe a condom was all it took to avoid AIDS ; maybe it was n't enough .
Sitting on the edge of a desk was a man whom the minister recognized as Arthur Cromwell .
Our predecessor Pius XII reminded all of their common duty in these words : " A principal note of the Church is catholicity ; consequently , a man is no true member of the Church unless he is likewise a true member of the entire body of Christian believers and is filled with an ardent desire to see her take root and flourish in every land .
Fisher called Children of God " an American epic , " and an epic is a celebration , not an indictment .
Oh , how sweet a life is this life of union with the good God !
Phosphoprotein data can be drilled down to view the probability that a peptide is a phosphopeptide and that a phosphorylation site is actually phosphorylated .
" A god is the ultimate dreamer : he brings a new vision , a new way of seeing , to the culture .
" A god is a translator ( 106 ) ; his task is to find meaning , to make connections , to translate experience into understanding .
The mass was in the right lower lobe so a surgeon was the next person involved in the process .
An example is the thriftiness exhibited by people who survived the " great depression .
Reading a copy is a great way to discover for yourself exactly what the Entrepreneur 's Circle is all about so if you 'd like us to mail a recent edition to you , we 'd be happy to oblige ( we 'll even use a first class stamp ! ) Just fill in your details below ...
A twenty-two was a real rifle .
In other things , where God has so created them , it is proper to observe the difference , for instance , that a woman is a woman , and a man a man , that worldly government must be distinguished from its subjects , and in like manner other worldly conditions .
Migraine with aura : an aura is a warning symptom or sign that develops before the headache itself .
I came to this realization in much more profound ways once I immigrated to the U.S. My friend Andrej Grubacic wrote eloquently : " Yugoslavia for me , and for people like me , was never just a country-it was an idea .
A mutation is a change in the DNA sequence or code of a gene that may lead to the production an abnormal form of the encoded protein .
At assemblies we did not debate what you were to be and what would become of me , but rather ways of improving output , of organising the work better , ways of streamlining processes , because a factory is a complicated business of course .
Miguel CELMA : In terms of efficiency I could see no difference ; 100 men calling themselves a centuria were every bit as effective as 100 calling themselves a company .
The intrinsic features of a thing are those which it has in and of itself ; while its extrinsic features are those which it has only in its relation to something else .
The median survival with a condition is the amount of time after which 50 % of people have died and 50 % are still alive .
An estuary is a body of water partially surrounded by land where fresh water from a river mixes with salt water .
A test for determining if a chemical is a mutagen .
Such an examination is a summary analysis that does not imply prejudging or offering an initial opinion on the merits .
One of the most significant aspects of such a kitchen is the layout ; here are a few of the more popular layouts for contemporary kitchens with a twist .
What makes the degradation ceremony so serious an occasion is the nature of the public denunciation .
Roughly speaking , a haiduc is a renegade knight , a well-meaning bandit , a sort of local Robin Hood .
In August 1919 Ernest Jones and a companion were the first foreign civilians to reach Vienna after the war .
A barn was a house or shed for storing crops ; in the colonies the word came to mean a place for keeping cattle also .
Writing a book is a lot of discipline .
In this analysis the emergence of a problem is a social process to be examined , it is a social construction whose " empirical reality is contestable " ( p 7 ) .
" George Halas , Football Coach " Moving to a coach from a manager is a huge change .
Suppose you said a painting was an illusion .
In determining whether a new manifestation of an item is a copy of an earlier manifestation or an edition separate from the earlier manifestation , thus requiring its own bibliographic record , consult the definition of " Edition " in Appendix D. If , according to this definition , two items are known to be two different editions , create a separate record for each .
The blood red color of her clothing makes Julie easier to see in the dark , and a mini-skirt is an improvement over more clichéd costumes ( such as a monk 's robe . ) Still , trudging about darkened rooms , fields and a cemetery at night in high heels and a corset is really odd .
The Court established that the right to appeal a decision is an essential guarantee that must be honored in the context of due process of law , in order to allow an adverse opinion to be reviewed by a different and hierarchically superior judge or tribunal .
( A meta-analysis is the preferred scientific procedure for drawing definitive conclusions from large bodies of research . ) The study evaluated three key indicators of relaxation and found that Transcendental Meditation provides a far deeper state of relaxation than does simple eyes-closed rest .
A choil is a natural result of drawing the edge down in forging and is useful in allowing complete access to the edge in sharpening .
An aggregation is a covering of which no element is part of another .
To promise the devotion of a lifetime is no commonplace contract .
To authorize a person for a lifetime is no ordinary act of trust .
A torch is an essential item of equipment for a rummager and Waterguard Officers were issued with a variety of ' official ' makes and models deemed suitable for their needs at the time .
A yurt is a circular tent-like structure originally used by nomadic Mongols .
It seems from the instructions to younger widows that one requirement of being on such a list is a pledge to remain unmarried , so that you could devote all your time and energies into serving the Lord .
A faucet is the last necessity .
However , a tripod is a must .
Nonetheless , a tripod is a must .
Nevertheless , a tripod is a must .
30 minutes a day is all it takes to start to feel the difference .
Other South-North influences are more overarching ; an example is the influence of so-called ' black primitivism ' , within the black internationalist ambience of Paris , on surrealism via Picasso 's cubism ; surrealism then further influenced the poetry of Aime Cesaire of Notebook of a Return to my Native Land .
It bolsters the false idea that a male is a complete human and a female a deficient one .
A reliever is the one you use when you are having an attack - it gets rid of the symptoms .
Returning is one thing , but finding a mate is another .
Was in two minds weather a playpen was a good idea or something that was going to be an expensive mistake that never got used .
A sample is a short clip of music , it may last up to 10 seconds or just a micro second for a sound effect , depending on the tempo at which the track has been set .
So to blame parts being unavailable as an excuse is a little limp in my opinion .
Indeed a levy is an encourage not to look after them in future .
15 # " Indeed a levy is an encourage not to look after them in future .
His decision to tackle such a role was a brave one , but Cooper believes you have to be prepared to stumble if you want to progress .
The main feature of a Doctorate is the thesis .
Nidx The nodal index , used in deciding whether or not a spot is a nodal for the plot colour coded by nodality , can be reset via the ' Nidx ' value item on the control panel .
In the first few cycles of adding water , such a procedure is a powerful way of steering the refinement in the right direction .
But a don 's a don for a ' that .
So firstly the positive aspects , because there are many and there 's a reason that a dog still is man 's best friend , for having recently given our dogs away I realise that what I miss the most about having a dog is the company .
if a blister is the only victim of this mistake then please get over it .
The beach is right next to the complex and it is clean and at 7 euros per day for 2 sunbeds and a parasol is a cheap way to escape the claustrophobia of the pool area .
i am a member been a fully paid up member since 1985 seen many changers in the club but it whent to pot when pete white took it over .. should change the name to petes club .. i was in friday night it was dead ... saturday night heres johny was their it was full .
One of the critical components for a turntable is the main bearing which must offer minimal friction and hold the platter fixed in all planes except rotation - all this with minimal play and as little vibration as possible .
Alsio forcing people to go out into the road to signal to a bus is a potential danger .
you do n't think a thief is a scumbag ?
( 6 ) Any reference in this section to the maximum term of imprisonment permitted for an offence is a reference to the maximum term of imprisonment that is , apart from section 225 , permitted for the offence in the case of a person aged 18 or over .
the best place to have a breakfast is a place called california .
A life is a life regardless of country .
A life is a life and if a rescue is willing to save that life , regardless of where it was born , they have my respect .
I think one factor to measure color quality in a production is the actual setting itself .
The use of a pentagon is a step from period practice .
Therefore , the use of a hexagon is a step from period practice .
A hand is an object , just as a sword is .
As mentioned elsewhere on this letter , the use of a hexagon is a step from period practice .
The use of a hummingbird is a step from period practice .
As you 'll read , a portfolio is the most important thing you 'll do when applying to a job .
Learning to work with a hangover is an important modern lifeskill .
Such a means is a sturdy vessel to get you across the ocean of samsara ( illusion ) .
Right now , health care as an industry is a major source of climate-changing pollution .
I want to be a Jazz artist , that is like my dream , and being in front of a band is a part of that and Jazz usually has a slower groove .
Simply put , a component is a piece of your app 's infrastructure tasked with a specific function .
SONG : WAR , JFM , WU and Chorus of Computers : An astronomer is a sorry soul , As free as a caged bird ; His sympathetic ear should be always quick to hear The directorial word .
For an astronomer is a sorry soul , As free as a caged bird , His sympathetic ear should be always quick to hear The directorial word .
The greatest strength of _ Biedermeier : The Invention of Simplicity _ as an exhibition was the way in which the actual objects and their " modern " appearance ( more about that in a moment ) challenge conventional stereotypes about Biedermeier .
A map is a model .
To a five year old , a grandmother is a majestic figure of warmth and comfort ; to a teenager you are impressive and inspiring with your wisdom and world experience ; and to young adults you are remarkable in your ability to discern real issues from petty ones and to offer lasting advice .
A tracker is a list of requirements that you must complete for your student 's school .
A requirement is an item that you need to complete for your student 's tracker .
Whether or not a decision is a good one or not is often never known because follow up actions are undertaken to stay the course and we will never know how much better or worse things could have been if another course of action was taken .
Offering me veggies 3 times a day is a guideline .
Hospital laboratories must report all laboratory-confirmed influenza to the Department of Health and specify if a patient is an inpatient or an outpatient .
Malcolm Roffe undertook much research in presenting a case for the installation of toilets at the allotment 's site , but the considerable expense this would involve makes it unlikely that such a facility is a practical and the idea will not be pursued as a result .
A test is a special form of assessment .
We also know that having a plan is the key to accomplishing what you want - it 's why the meal plans make it so easy for you to eat healthy ; you have a plan !
Doug 's suspicion of a hacker is a good one .
Nothing special caught , although a Buff-tip was a pleasing reward .
" A blog is a web page made up of usually short , frequently updated posts that are arranged chronologically - like a what 's new page or a journal .
A bid is a bid why would any business pay more for goods than they have to ?
A squatter is a person who enters and occupies property without permission from the person entitled to possession of the property .
Coopsie we all know he is a team player and he has some good friends here now and is settled , how much off a part is the money going to play now , if true manure are going to be offering 120 k - 150 k a week and the Billionairs up to 200 k if true and we are at 100 k plus bounouses .
The basis of such an investigation is the assumption that phenomena such as poverty , climate change or racism are symptoms of capitalist society 6.00 pm - Shut them down - again ?
I wo n't enter in details , you can check the Atari forums , but a pad is a must since the game will stop working with the keyboard + mouse .
In hindsight I think my tactics were a little too defensive , and I did invite them to come at me , but a point is a point so I was happy with that against one of the big guns .
Sygate Personal Firewall : A firewall is a piece of software that monitors all incoming network traffic and allows in only the connections that are known and trusted .
Since Alcina is historically dared by virtuosic sopranos like Sutherland and Battle , this innovative recording with a mezzo is a must-have not just for Alcina freaks but all who adore sensational vocalism .
An example is the Partnership for a New Generation of Vehicles ( PNGV ) .
A church is a place where the Word of God and the sacraments are rightly applied .
In A scrubber is a ventilation control device built into the continuous miner that is designed to reduce the dust in the air .
Such a program is an essential complement to minimizing the potential risks of instability in Russia associated with the on-going political and economic turmoil .
Yes , when a woman is the most powerful , influential female in the world , why are we talking about her glasses , or Michelle Obama 's bangs / arms / gown for that matter , when we should be talking about said woman 's achievements or failures as we would do a man ?
hashtagblank hashtagblank class A { public : A(void) throw ( ... ) ; virtual ~ A(void) throw ( ) ; virtual int Add ( int , int ) throw ( std : : overflow_error ) ; virtual float Add ( float , float ) throw ( ) ; virtual double Add ( double , double ) throw(int) ; } ; class B : public A { public : B(void) ; / / Fine , since not having a throw is the same as throw ( ...
A photojournalist is a mixture of a cool , detached professional and a sensitive , involved citizen .
A revolution is an insurrection , an act of violence by which one class overthrows another .
A model is an idealized concept to be accomplished .
A robin is the first sign of spring 2 .
Poor working relationships amongst co-workers in an organization is a potential source of stress .
In real life , in geometry , a square is a particular form of rectangle .
A square is a rectangle with equal width and height , and we could do a strange implementation like in the above example .
Criticism without a solution is a waste of a post .
The closest we get to an explanation is a scene of the first victim riding her skateboard into a collision with a mirror - which apparently reminds the killer of the mirror his mother smashed while scolding him .
CommonServiceLocator for MEF , a service is a service .
An example is the Attic Thargelia , in which two human scape-goats annually bore " the sins of the congregation , " and were flogged , driven to the sea with figs tied round their necks , and burned .
If it be suggested [ it is that of ] R. Eliezer , [ how could it be stated that ] ' if she drew off [ the levir 's shoe ] but did not spit nor recite , her halizah is valid ' when , surely , R. Eliezer said : SO SHALL BE DONE , ANYTHING WHICH IS A DEED IS A SINE QUA NON ?
A : A prospect is a student in the ninth grade or above regardless of their athletic talent .
The rest of the loop simply writes some HTML to an array , which we saw in the GeoNames Form View gets used to create the results div. Writing multiple lines of HTML and pushing them into an array is a quick way to dynamically create HTML without having to access the DOM over and over again .
But they chose explicitly to make them eligible in the sense that they took out the enforcement , but they also said that they were n't supposed to get it , so it 's kind of like a - would an analogy be a speed limit on a highway and then a pronouncement that police will never patrol that highway ?
Aside from platform , browser , available technologies and screen resolution , another major factor in designing for an audience is the width of the browser window .
I think making a list is a good idea .
A bot is a service , which repeatedly does a series of tasks , such as building , testing , analyzing , archiving , and signing an application ( tasks that traditionally would be done manually by developers ) .
A module is a simple , optimized database which keeps the parsed code of a single system header file ( for example UI Kit.h , Web kit.h , etc. ) within .
The language as a whole is no longer functional ( though it may certainly qualify as an imperative language with a pure functional subset ) .
A process is a series of actions , and the only actions any closed process may ever perform are communications with an environment that said process ca n't even deductively proves actually exists ( read up a little on Solipsism ) .
That being so , a ComputationalLanguage is a bag of arbitrary language features , i.e. , a MultiParadigmLanguage .
A ComputationalLanguage is any language that provides exactly only one way of looking at things : the provably necessary logics and physics of computation .
( A value is a value , no matter how it 's represented . ) Those that take MultiParadigm ?
If I understand correctly , then , a ComputationalLanguage is a language built from ComputationalPrimitives .
" That a dog is an > > animal is inherent in " All dogs are animals , " making the conclusion to the > > syllogism nonsense .
I am not of Indian descent OR Hindu , but in Trinidad , where I grew up , and where everyone is a bit of a mix ( they do n't call it the Rainbow Nation for no reason ! ) a holiday is a holiday and everyone celebrates everything .
Perhaps a billboard outside a building is a touch more accessible than the Edinburgh Gazette .
For example , the marked register of people who have cast their vote in an election is a document to which candidates can gain access .
According to Lazarev : ' The rights of the individual and the citizen are one thing and the rights of an organisation are another - we need to separate the wheat from the chaff .
You see normally you 'll find that a director or a producer is a very forward guy because he has to tell so many people what to do .
And the accepted picture of a composer is the exact opposite , a man who ca n't articulate what he wants .
There are , today , many different forms of dispute resolution and a public inquiry may not be the only means of applying the necessary rigour ; but the adversarial format of an inquiry is a well-established means of testing and establishing facts .
Such a religion is the kind that Marxists like to see - an opiate of the people .
A template is a separate picture that contains areas that the printer recognises as transparent , allowing you to place it over your regular prints .
A jirga is the traditional forum for discussing and resolving disputes , part parliament , part court of law .
Lambretta 's managing director , Rob Harmer explained : " Designing the exterior and interior of a car is an entirely different challenge to our core business of fashion and accessories , but there are clearly some shared philosophies between the two companies , which made this collaboration so exciting .
Since a virus is a program , it needs to be executed to be a threat .
I 'm not suggesting that a pound is a better option , but you KNOW that you 're getting a complete unknown , rather than just being told the information that a rescue want you to have .
A colonoscope is a tube which is long enough but sufficiently flexible to be passed through your back passage along the whole length of the colon .
I do n't think what reforms a church is a question of either / or , of church vs society .
Failure to comply with a condition of an order is an arrestable offence .
High up on a hill was a sign that advertised the area we were passing through as SOUTH SAN FRANCISCO -- THE INDUSTRIAL CITY .
On this , three separate-but-equal points : • A donation is a legitimate expression of interest .
• A donation is an act of charity , not a purchase of stock .
The significance of such an exercise is the invitation to participate in a fruitful and friendly exchange of religious ideas , values and precepts in order to strengthen interpersonal tools of listening and learning , and deepen mutual understanding and self-understanding .
A microwave is a must-have for the busy family .
A gall is an abnormal growth of plant tissue due to an external cause .
Needless to say , a woman is the cause of this poor , innocent man 's misery ...
A poem is a poem - unless it is a limerick of course !
It would not be surprising if the Duke 's contemporaries concluded that such a disease was the consequence of fornication .
A tree is a solar-powered fountain , its sprays supplied through wood-lined conduits and sealed in by bark until their final outburst in leaves .
A proctoscope is a small metal tube that incorporates a torch and a magnifying lens .
But Chairs covers £ 3 a chair is a rip off and im struggling to find them cheaper !!
Being that impressed with a wedding service or product that you are looking to write a recommendation is the first step .
A taw-raw is the fiddle of the Shan people of Burma and the piece evokes the sounds of the landscape of that country .
One of the most common errors on a website is the use of ' Click here ' .
The first preference on a ballot is the single candidate or other choice with " 1 " written against it .
So just keep going , if a lawyer is all you want to be , and that is your vocation , just keep going you will get there .
The unauthorised lopping or felling of such a tree is a serious criminal offence and can result in a fine of up to £ 20,000 .
The Asus UL 30 A laptop is a portable WiFi ( wireless broadband ) enabled netbook with an impressive boot up of 8 seconds time and an 8 hour extended battery life .
The good news is that a taxi is the best place to lose a mobile .
A saggar is a fireclay box for holding ware during firing .
Birmingham was not quite so bad and until the last minute you though that a point was a good result .
A spokesperson for ABTA - The Travel Association - said : ' A euro is a euro regardless of where it is printed .
And if a university is the end of learning , it does n't either .
His father was frequently in trouble and a mother was both pitifully poor and unable to cope with her uncontrollable children .
A footprint is a geographic catalog of all your services .
But what is truly a winner is the App Store !
She says being a cooperadora is an honor .
Mercedes says , " A cooperador is a leader because if a sick person is found in my community , I can bring him / her to the nearest medical center .
You ca n't get off claiming that a word is an accurate descriptor only if you use it .
BEHIND a veil is a column , on which are poised two intersecting disks , terrestrial and celestial , the cut-off part forming a true Vesica , fitting which is a shrine , capable of being opened and removed at will .
A conversation is the interchange between the IME and the application .
A clause is a range of the composition possibly sharing semantic information , such as indicating whether the input is in a selected or converted state .
When I was growing up , I can remember being taught in science class that a theory is a scientific concept that has some evidence of being true .
A file is a set of allocation units on a storage medium that externally is just a bag of bits ( or blocks ) without structure , without a name , and without any real way to navigate to it .
External to the data structures that deal with allocations and the basic concept of a container is a catalog structure that exposes a name and navigation ( directory / file a.k.a. folder / file ) system to users and applications .
Put another way , if the issue is an altered dielectric constant , and a dielectric is an electrical insulator that can be polarized by an applied electric field , then where 's the electric field and what 's polarizing the dielectric ?
" A baby is a blessing .
How do you know if getting a high school diploma or a GED is the right choice for you ?
in 1846 , for example , charles baudelaire wrote that ' painting is interesting only in virtue of line and colour ' ; in 1890 in a much quoted remark maurice denis said : ' remember that a picture-before being a war horse or a nude woman or an anecdote is essentially a flat surface covered with colours assembled in a certain order ' ; and in 1896 george santayana , after noting that colour may produce unpleasant as well as pleasant effects , ' almost like a musical discord ' , proposed that ' a more general development of this sensibility would make possible a new abstract art , an art that should deal with colours as music does with sound ' ( the analogy with music was often pursued ; whistler , for example , sometimes gave his paintings pseudo musical titles , as later did kandinsky , kupka , and other artists , including the lithuanian composer painter m .
As we all know that an adware is a program that installs an additional component which can be used to feed advertising , deliver pop-up ads or install a toolbar in your browser .
A cannon is any piece of artillery that uses gunpowder or other usually explosive-based propellants to launch a projectile .
One of the things that interests me most as a vidder is the way we are n't able to control the " spin " applied to our vids once they leave the relative safety of fandom and float off into the great unknown .
The focal plane of a camera is a plane located at a distance equal to the camera 's focal distance along its local Z axis ( or line of sight ) and oriented perpendicular to the camera 's local Z axis .
A lawyer-turned-cook is a sue chef .
It 's pricy , so if you 're looking to spend this kind of money we 'd recommend checking out a receiver and separate speakers , but if a soundbar is the way you want to go , and you 're looking for big sound , the PowerBar 235 is the way to go .
A machine is a machine , and he 's never worth the life of any human .
From the botanical point of view , an herb is a seed plant that does not produce a woody stem , but will live long enough to develop flowers and seeds .
According to Mr Drury the claim that Lakeland Health had instructed him to refer David to a psychiatrist was a misrepresentation of the facts .
To the expert 's suggestion that coming off a drug was a high risk time , Mr Drury responded that in order to assess that a statement had to be made about the relative strengths of the drug he was on and the new one 13 .
Praying while walking on a path which happens to be called a labyrinth is a waste ...
Robert Downey Jr as a superhero is an unlikely bit of casting , but it works perfectly .
To determine whether an offense is a " violent felony " under the ACCA , we follow the categorical approach set forth by the Supreme Court in Taylor v. United States , 495 U.S. 575 ( 1990 ) , and Shepard v. United States , 544 U.S. 13 ( 2005 ) ; that is , we look only to the statutory definition of the crime .
Walker was a career offender under USSG § 4 B 1.1 ( a ) , which provides that a defendant is a career offender if he " has at least two prior felony convictions of either a crime of violence or a controlled substance offense .
It is well established that whether a crime is a violent felony must be determined on a categorical basis , not on the specific facts of the case .
Whether something is an addiction or not , calling it an addiction is a way to remove freedom of choice from the individual .
While a funeral is no place to rehearse , say , a man 's role in the death of a beautiful young woman , such events and conduct should have , I think , instilled some restraint in the rush to proclaim the man 's accomplishments .
Symphony , concert , theater , sporting event or museum , tickets to an event is a great no-waste present .
At issue : How much of a person is a private for-profit corporation ?
A child is a person , but has no right to vote .
As someone said , " I wo n't believe a corporation is a person until Texas executes one .
The right to present a defense is a " fundamental element of due process of law .
A soundscape is an environment which is created by sound .
But the decisive overall argument against a bubble is the fact that the large tech companies are largely not putting their cash to work , and those that do , like Microsoft purchasing Skype and pursuing Yahoo , are largely criticized for it .
However , it makes a certain amount of sense that during a bubble , accompanying the over investment of [ monetary ] capital into a space is the over investment of human capital into the space .
The basic value of a company is the time-discounted value of future earnings plus assets minus debts .
The fact this range-topping A 6 is an estate is both inconsequential and key to its appeal .
Using an AbstractBaseClass is the most common way to do it in languages like C++ that do n't support DuckTyping .
Legal sufficiency of a claim is a question of law that we review de novo .
" If a person is a victim of violence and they happen to be taken to a hospital and they 're not given this option , that 's a sad state of affairs for that woman , " said Dianne Luby , chief executive of Planned Parenthood League of Massachusetts .
The meaning of the word ' virtue ' , as understood in the Catholic tradition is this : ' A virtue is an habitual and firm disposition to do that which is good .
Eminent scientists and philosophers believe that this zygote is an actual human individual in much the same way as an infant is an actual human person with potential to develop to maturity .
( 40 ) a cognitive environment of an individual is a set of facts that are manifest to him .
Swing path : the most common reason for a push is the swing path of the club .
Paying in advance or getting a guarantor is a way around this .
Where a complaint is neither frivolous nor vexatious , the Commission must then determine whether a complaint is a conduct or a services complaint or whether the complaint contains issues of both conduct and services and , if so , to what extent .
Do n't ever acknowledge that you think a person is a bad photo taker .
A cookie is a small text file that is stored on a user 's computer for record-keeping purposes .
The f-number of an lens is the ratio between the diameter of the aperture and the focal length of a lens .
From April 2013 if at least one of a couple in a family is a higher rate tax payer all child benefit will be lost .
A further issue considered by the Committee was the proposal that evidence from a single source will be sufficient to establish whether a person is a worker ( section 1 ( 4 ) of the Bill ) .
What about the ebay policy of a sale being a binding contract on both parties ?
Lack of an idea is an obstacle " Ken Hakuta ( er ... are you sure about this , Brenda ?!
After all , having a baby was the most natural thing in the world and besides she had Daisy with her .
A phoenix is a mythical bird with a colourful plumage and a tail of gold and scarlet ( or purple and blue , according to some sources [ 1 ] ) .
Distance to a store was the second most influential factor in influencing walking , with location and the accessibility of transit next .
However , Astrantia major as a species is a very cool plant and has a place in virtually any garden .
Perhaps I 'm biased , but visiting a website without a blog is a turn off .
* Troi is not in the episode because it was decided a warship was no place for a therapist -- though Marina Sirtis does not appear in the bookending scenes set in the original timeline either .
[ 8 ] In addition , all members of the Court agreed that damages rather than an injunction was the primary remedy for a breach of privacy , so even had the plaintiffs been able to meet the threshold they may well have failed to get the remedy they wanted .
Tipping J is also forthright on the ability of the common law to act unless Parliament clearly states that an enactment is a codification : para 227 -228 .
An acid is a chemical species that releases H+ ions into solution , as does H 2 CO 3 to form HCO 3 - and CO 32 -. Adding CO 2 to water causes the pH to drop .
Not that acting out as a ephebophile or a hebephile is any less revolting .
A tornado is an extreme event , but one whose causes , sensitivity to change and impacts have nothing to do with those related to an ice storm , or a heat wave or cold air outbreak or a drought .
So the solution to a singularity is the elimination of the basic singularity , that being the universe .
Such an outcome is all but impossible .
Getting $ 10 million in funding for a business is the biggest and most important deal in the life of a company .
Sometimes a stroke is the first sign a person has of other health conditions , such as high blood pressure , diabetes or atrial fibrillation ( a heart rhythm disorder ) .
The idea that time is only part of a dimension is a rather strange one , because if there is only a part of time existing that that part is the full dimension of time that we have .
The Spirit of God descending like a DOVE is another of those types .
More importantly , the Internal Revenue Service has developed a list of twenty factors that it examines in making a determination whether a worker is an employee or an independent contractor for tax purposes .
A rapier is a little different from foil and épée .
Likewise , a woman is the image and glory of a man ( 11:7 ) .
On the absolute conception , these all mean that each and every action of breaking a promise is a wrong action , whatever else there may be to be said for it .
There is a principle that says ' Be just ' , but this does not mean that all just actions are in fact right ; it only means that the justness of an action counts in its favour , or that an action is the better for being just .
The pronunciation is somewhat similar to the Chinese tones ( kungs ) : the spelling of a word is the same , but according to the tonal value or stress given , its meaning alters .
Yet such an attitude is a clear and indeed paradigmatic example of partiality , requiring that an agent feel and act differently toward one set of persons than she does toward humanity in general .
After all , an audit is an audit .
Studying for the AAT Accounting Qualification through an apprenticeship is the smart way to get valuable work experience while gaining a widely-recognised professional qualification .
The initial gust of wind , cry of a gull or break of a wave are all important factors to their work and get translated into the painting to make us believe that we too are teetering on the edge of the cliff with only a blade of grass and a granite outcrop between us and the ocean .
A manometer is a device for measuring the difference in pressure between two systems .
At last mother church seems to show signs of realising what any parent or teacher knows already - that forbidding the discussion of an issue is the best way to stimulate it , whilst also guaranteeing that any debate that does take place is liable to be based on limited premises , so remaining ill-informed , counter-productive , stressful and combative rather than constructive .
To recap on B-trees themselves : a B-tree is a fixed-depth tree ( any path from the root to a leaf is the same length ) with variable size nodes .
A drain is a pipe that takes sewage from only one house .
A sewer is a pipe that carries sewage from two or more houses .
An example were the teachers who toured the dental clinic of the East Central District Health Department and saw the employee skills in practice such as ICT computer control , maths , critical thinking , communications , basic science and design and technology .
The detective work needed by children to research a project is an essential tool in their learning process resources .
Sure , a pizza is a pizza but these were really fresh and good quality .
It is better to ensure that internal spaces are well-proportioned and that the accommodation flows well - knocking down a wall or opening up an alcove is a clear way to show buyers the potential they are buying into ...
Rather , a fact is a possible object of thought ; it is something a subject may think , and thoughts - that is , thinkings - contain their objects .
Abstract : Fictive utterance theories of fictionality hold that a text that includes a narrative is the vehicle for a fiction only if it is the product of an act of fictive utterance , a kind of speech act that invites the receiver to make-believe rather than believe what is narrated .
In the version of the fictive utterance theory that I have defended e.g. in Aesthetics and Literature ( Continuum , 2007 ) , chapter 3 ) , fictionality also requires that the overriding motivation of the author in constructing a narrative be some story-telling objective other than the desire to relate what is true .
With its alternative educational model , Bakis called into question the nation-state 's attempts to promote a concept of personhood revolving around conformism , obedience and citizenship , and promoted the idea of a person being an independent individual endowed with ' rights ' .
A cruise is a great way to explore the islands and enjoy a rich itinerary snorkelling with sea lions , observing hawks , penguins and flamingos , giant tortoise and iguanas or , spotting fur seals and hammerhead sharks .
FIFA appear unwilling to change , investigating Bin Hamman a week before a vote is an exeptional piece of theatre by any standards .
" Ninety per cent of what you need as a footballer is the commitment , the professionalism and things like that .
" ( 2 ) A bet is a spread bet if it constitutes a contract the making or accepting of which is a regulated activity within the meaning of section 22 of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 .
' An oxymoron is a contradiction in terms , ' explains her father .
I 've said it before , a watch is the single most important accessory a man can own -- it is an essential style element .
The following Arabic proverb rings true : " A mother is a school ; if you have prepared her well , you have prepared good people .
A rusalka is a Russian ghost : a drowned maiden who dies for love will become a rusalka , haunting the river where she perished .
What is an Actuary : An actuary is a highly trained statistician with expertise in evaluating various types of risks .
What 's to Like : An actuary is a highly respected professional who is an important influencer of company policy , if not a final decision maker .
A fiesta is a party or festival .
A titer is a good idea if you 're concerned about over-vaccination , especially if she is still in poor health And if the titer ultimately shows she needs a booster you can give it to her then .
A gang is a group of people with a common objective , interest , identity and mission .
In this way , a gang is a business .
STRNUMBER ( ) Determine whether a string is a valid numeric value .
A car is a not a phone .
When you are less than 6 degrees removed from the foremost expert on a topic , searching a database is the long way around .
Without curiosity a business is a bunch of followers with no leaders , no driving energy from within .
Please know that a blog is a conversation not a catalogue .
Preventing a lapse is the best solution , but early intervention can help bring a portion of these donors back from the brink .
Such a form is the cognitive structure or the organizational procedure of human processes .
A genome is the full set of genetic information of an organism .
A function is a set of data that has one distinct output for each input .
The perimeter of a rectangle is a function of the polygon 's length and width .
The sale price of a sweater is a function of the original price and the discount rate .
Setting fire to a bra was a way for the media-savvy protesters to call attention to their grievances - specifically , a controversial police report about rape .
A necessary condition for a phenomenon is a factor in whose absence the phenomenon wo n't occur .
Lutepo implicated Mpinganjira on the same issue and why should a suspect be a spokesperson of the issue in which he is involved ?
These days a website is a reflection of your business , resort , shop , hotel or personal adventures .
A lie is an abominable thing that God hates .
This tutorial illustrates how the amount time required to charge and discharge a capacitor is a very important factor in the design of electrical circuits .
A second is the June 23 premiere at the Music Box of a 35 mm restoration by the Northwest Chicago Film Society of a long-unseen hillbilly Western swing musical , " Corn ' s-A-Poppin ' , " written by Robert Altman .
A perennial is the " sin tax .
A chord is a line segment fully contained in that connects two cogrid ( concave ) vertices .
And , as we have learned from a president who so often thinks giving a speech is a substitute for solving a problem , she had the better argument .
Origins of the bun that transforms the hamburger into a sandwich are a bit more mysterious .
To trade that money again for an object is another crime , a second crime , bringing a final , irrevocable closure to the first extortion .
Used in combination with a short code , a keyword is a word that differentiates a mobile campaign from others on the same short code .
The depth ( or precision if you like ) of an address is a common problem .
Providing me with a copy is no guarantee of a good review as the folks at Freespire found out last year .
The quintessential example of an algebra is a group , which is a set $G$ together with three operations $u : 1 \ to A $ , $i : A \ to A $ , and $m : A ^ 2 \ to A$ of arities 0 , 1 , and 2 , respectively .
Answer : update with $t$ happens before update with $u$ because the argument of an operation is the stuff that happens after the operation .
It does not break equivalence-invariance to state that two morphisms are equal , given a common source and target ; this is because a hom-set is a set , where equality is meaningful .
Consider the assertion that a category is a groupoid .
A divorce is an incredibly difficult , if not the most difficult thing to go through .
A turtle is a tough animal .
Just as a wedding is a rite that publicly and formally initiates a marriage , baptism is a rite that publicly and formally initiates a person 's saving relationship with Jesus Christ .
A microcontroller is a highly integrated chip which includes , on one chip , all or most of the parts needed for a controller .
Monitor A monitor is a program installed in the microcontroller which provides basic development and debug capabilities .
By programming in assembler , you master the underlying architecture of the chip , which is important if you intend to do anything significant with your microcontroller 7.2 ) Interpreters An interpreter is a high level language translator that is closer to natural language .
When the results are satisfactory , you can then add additional components until the final product is achieved 7.3 ) Compilers A compiler is a high level language translator that combines the programming ease of an interpreter with greater speed .
An emulator is a sophisticated device that pretends that it is the microprocessor itself , while at the same time capturing information .
Turns out not every business run by a woman is a non-profit or a charity , yet men in tech start the conversation by demanding to know how they can make a charitable donation to the cause .
A glacier is a body of snow and ice that moves .
The only thing they sold at a loss was the ps 4 , the ps 3 was sky high when released and their TV 's are way overpriced for what they offer that also goes for their phones .
" It 's like going over a waterfall-there 's no escape .
A cliff is any steep slope that has been formed by natural processes .
A fjord is a deep , narrow flooded inlet of the sea that was formed during the last Ice Age .
A gorge is a steep-sided river valley which is very narrow and deep .
A reservoir is an artificial lake created by building a dam across a river .
A river is a naturally winding watercourse that drains surplus water from a drainage basin .
A valley is a long trough in the landscape that has been eroded by a river or a combination of river and glacier action .
What is striking across these three tracks ( including Look After my Girl ) and across the LP as a whole is the personal references no generic , mediocre gangsta rap here people , this is a modern UK MC .
To be fair most lawyers realise this , and to some extent a lawyer can be forgiven for assuming that being a lawyer is a passport to skill in every area of the law , including family law .
Websters wallop for £ 2.50 a pint is a bargain .
Writing an essay is an opportunity to learn your material and to show what you know .
The most famous example of a reframe is the half glass of liquid situation .
An object is the basic unit of a program .
Shell programming : A shell is the userland portion of Linux which provides the command-line interface for UNIX-like operating systems , including Linux .
NLP is what NLP is , in just the same way that a hammer is a hammer .
The other who must have been an octogenarian was a retired Annibynnwr ( Independent or Welsh Congregational ) Welsh speaking retired Minister from London .
A desk is a dangerous place from which to watch the world .
But then again , a win is a win .
An example is a bibliography manager - similar to Endnote .
Remember that technically a tomato is a fruit not a vegetable , despite what it tastes like or what type of plant it grows on .
" Creativity in the curriculum continues to inspire the pupils and adults in our school and the evidence in increased learning levels within a subject and confidence achieved as a result are a real achievement .
Watching him work from a distance was a bent old man , leaning heavily upon a gnarled cane .
By definition a bedroom is a room for sleeping and on the evidence it was not reasonably possible to sleep in the room .
Peerage - a peer is a lord .
In some cases a print is the only record of a lost work .
Personas also display new reward badges , showing whether a reader is a new commenter , or a trusted veteran .
Sat , 26 Sep 09 Intel Wants to Put the Internet Inside Your TV uriblank The dream of taking Internet TV to an actual TV seems a no-brainer to consumers : a screen 's a screen , and a monitor 's just another screen , after all .
A watermark is a logo , legend or other sign superimposed on a photo to identify its origin .
Also , preparing for a fight is a very unique and intense personal experience .
You guys rocked and I had a blast being a part of that .
Selecting a speaker is a daunting process and choosing the right person from the thousands who claim to be amazing can be nigh on impossible .
A misdiagnosis is a terrible thing to happen to any patient and it may not always be the fault of the medical team involved yet the doctor must follow a certain standard of professionalism when treating their patients as they have a duty of care towards them .
An eagle is a noble bird , and there are none too many of them now in this country .
I really feel sorry for people who missed out on that formative experience , since being a post-processualist is no fun if you have no sins to confess , and came into academic life after it had all been worked out .
A farm is an unpredictable environment as employees must deal with temperamental animals as well as working with machinery .
A weblog is a journal ( or newsletter ) that is frequently updated and intended for general public consumption .
3 ) That you find after reading the appendices that any variations on the contract actually result in a decrease is the contract value not an increase .
More generally , I am sure that all would agree that it would be an improvement were the Trades to be more accessible .
One word of warning though , changing the size of a partition is a generally safe procedure but do n't take chances and back up any irreplaceable data first .
Bleeding a radiator is the most common and effective way of rousing the beast .
A draw was a fair result after a bun fight that slowed up around the hour mark giving Boro a few chances to progress .
Now a kelek is a raft made of logs or brushwood laid over inflated skins , and it carried all the merchandise of the Tigris .
" Plaschke continues : " For these people , having a phone is a tool , not a fashion accessory .
So beer-off for an off-licence is a distinctive form ( found in East Yorkshire ) , while happen is a verb in Standard English , but in some Yorkshire dialects is used as an adverb , in the sense of " maybe " or " perhaps " , corresponding to Shakespeare 's haply .
In other words , the individual is not protesting , the Internet as a collective is the one who protests .
I believe that a team is a reflection of the managers personality .
Just days after the now-famous TV quote was published , Nick Bilton of The New York Times pointed to an anonymous Apple source who stated a television was a " guaranteed product for Apple , " and that it had been in the works for years .
Crab A crab is an animal with a shell .
Earthworm An earthworm is a little animal with a long , soft body and no legs .
A friend is a principal of a lower income school and is not allowed to show " Akeelah and the Bee " to her 5th graders because it has one too many " cuss " words .
An example is that part of social security , or of unemployment compensation premiums , levied on the employer .
A landscape is a text for a geologist .
As an example of this consider the question of whether and in exactly what sense a student is the same person in class and out of school , in math class and in English class , in small-group work and in whole-class instruction .
Interpreting a statute is a question of law , one we usually review de novo .
For example , within the Where Your Page Likes Came From graph , I can see that a spike was the result of an abnormally high number of likes from Page Suggestions .
Now if you want much more of that absolute freedom and to live in a society were every retard with a death wish can print the deadliest weapons and no one should be able to stop him then i feel sorry for you .
A route is a URL pattern that is mapped to a handler .
Robert Louis An aspiration is a joy forever , a possession as solid as a landed estate .
But I do n't buy the idea that everyone who worships at a mosque is a killer-diller .
Rather , the cases tell us that the key in determining what , if any , deference courts are to pay to an administrative agency 's interpretation of a statute is the agency 's experience in administering the particular statutory scheme-and that experience must necessarily derive from consideration of a variety of factual situations and circumstances .
I would have gladly paid someone to give me a kidney , but exchanging money for an organ is a felony in this country .
I do n't believe the recession was caused by a fall in output , I believe a recession is a fall in output .
No , not really , unless you mean that vacant houses bought for speculation in a boom are no problem , because of the bubble , but only become a problem when the bubble pops .
That making use of a GPU that would n't otherwise be used in a desktop is a bad thing ?
Imaging hard drives is the process of taking a hard drive and copying it bit by bit to create an exact replica , in a way an " image "  just like a photograph of a person is a snapshot of them at any moment in time .
You had n't pointed this out but someone should ... what kind of a rebuke is that ?!?!
Telecasterisation , your not seeing the bigger picture we all have to refuse the system one way or another , I know that givening up a home is a bit much for some people , but most of are tax money is wasted and used to control us , plus the sh * t will hit the fan !
A run on a bank is a systemic failure .
Growing a hedge is the best thing to do .
Well when she is full of hydraulic oil everything mostly works ... items that are a problem are the main rams leak all the hydraulic oil over time .
Forming a queue was the only way of ensuring fair distribution of goods : First come , first served .
The difference between a rut and a grave is the depth .
I understand that like any company operating in the UK they need to make money and providing a service is a very poor second to that .
" One fleet operator in West Sussex observes : " Insurance companies charge a premium based on a taxi being a business , but pay out on the basis of it being a high-mileage vehicle .
Being a nube is no handicap at all .
I think a dynohub is the best option because it has other advantages besides lighting .
So the fact of the oocyte that hard to switching on what you might want the same day , I have a good is this epidermal stem cells came from that singles parties where the cells .
In fact , the only transition that looks like a step is the one where occasionally the developing person or community perseveres too long in an easy , fast-growing , non-competitive , strategy allowing it to overshoot the resources and crash .
In some cases , it may remain uncertain whether a catastrophe was a terrorist operation or merely an unfortunate accident .
A baby is a captive before it is delivered into the world .
Here such a person is a hidden nature reserve .
A tap is a bolt-like tool for making female threads .
A die is a nut-like tool for making male threads .
The radiation in a spacecraft is the equivalent of getting eight chest X-rays every day .
In 2008 , the flawed use of the Value at Risk metric ( among others ) conspired to bring many large financial institutions because they assumed that price an value were the same thing .
An escalator 's a set of progressively enhanced stairs , although the people here did not get the memo , because this is somehow out of order .
Undermining public education during a recession is no way to build a world-class educational system , no way to create the economic engine of growth for our Nation for the next century when more than ever jobs will depend on what people know and their ability to think rather than what they can do with their hands .
There is the soul of a beast , a bird , etc. , but the soul of a man is another thing ; it is his understanding , and reason , and conscience , etc. And this soul , when it departs , he dies .
A streamline is the path that a fluid molecule follows .
Reading these notes in the night before a day is another good method to prepare for my next shooting theme , beyond checking through what I have already shot .
In the following example , the hashtagblank a selector is a cascading child of list and is therefore indented .
A program is a series of operation panels concatenated together , along with representations of control constructs such as loops and conditionals .
What appears in a script is an iconic representation of what appears on the screen .
Vitamin A deficiency is a leading cause of preventable blindness and death in children around the world .
When a platform is a business , it becomes all the more important for it to subscribe to principles so it can be relied upon .
Parents often say ridiculous and sometimes seem impossible to being a parent is a lifetime commitment , and without that , there is no risk of criminalizing couples dating service fife innocent , let alone negligent behavior .
A helicopter is a wonderful but expensive machine .
In the past , walking over a grave was a source of defilement .
A virgate is an uncertain measure , varying from fifteen to forty acres , but often twenty-five acres .
" An aid was a pecuniary tribute paid by a vassal to his lord on special occasions .
A pot 's a very good idea , especially if a program does different things depending upon light level / resistance .
Charging £ 15 to adopt a word is a novel approach and , again , it uses celebrities well .
A brand is a rather nebulous concept because it can be extended to cover a lot of quite intangible and hard to assess benefits , that are nonetheless genuine .
In its narrowest sense , a brand is the identifying name and symbols of a product or a related group of products .
Inflammation in a joint or around a wound is the body 's way of protecting the injured part while the process of repair takes place .
What builds a community and a country is a sense of shared responsibility , common endeavour and big national ambitions .
Meanwhile the fact that a big deal is still made about how the house has only got one hour of hot water a day is a joke ; if it 's supposed to make us feel intimidated or impressed or awestruck , it just does n't register anymore .
The Macaulay duration , often simply called the duration , of a bond is a measure of the average time it takes an investor to get their money ( principal and interest ) .
The value of a bond is the present value of the interest payments and the repayment of the principal .
Personal health problems tend to correlate with indices of multiple deprivation , from which it can be seen that the areas where we need to make an impact are the inner areas of towns and cities , and peripheral estates originally in local authority ownership .
A general meeting of a company is a meeting of all members of a company ( this usually means shareholders ) , and , in the UK , is simply called an general meeting unless it is the annual general meeting AGM A general may be called at any time .
An aim is a general statement of what you hope to achieve and will form the basis for your set of detailed objectives .
A workspace is the major unit of organisation and is mostly a bunch of settings .
A project is the minor unit of organisation .
It is usually obvious that a company is a technology company - so what is the point of the Techmark grouping ?
In simple terms a cookie is a small piece of information sent from our website to your computer to help us to identify you quickly .
It is either the desire to experience something or the desire to achieve something , and takes the form of two drives ( a drive is the energy component of motivation ) .
An emotion is an unconscious idea powered by either a pleasant or an unpleasant feeling .
A paradigm is a self-contained or closed system of meanings within which every problem is explained ( or ignored ) .
An ideology is a self-contained system of values .
In essentials , an ideology is a perspective for encapsulating power , and how that power is used .
Such a morality is a ' resentment-based ' morality , as analysed by Nietzsche in his books ' Beyond Good and Evil ' and ' On the Genealogy of Morals ' .
When you boil the terms we use down to their basic meanings , you 'll find that an illusion is where something seems other than it is , and that a trick is a hoax , a sly way of putting something over .
The construction of a contract is a question of law that we review de novo .
But after denying God and knowing yourself to be a blasphemer-that was the pain that lasted ...
A tricycle that can grow with a toddler is a great choice for a gift .
But then again , an elevator is a nice place for a little TV .
A duty is an obligation to conform to a particular standard of care or conduct associated with reasonable men under like circumstances .
What HeartMath contributes to this important conversation about mindfulness as a lifestyle is the powerful addition of shifting from head to heart .
The amount of low income housing tax credit available for allocation to a Project is that amount which the Department determines is necessary to make the Project financially feasible but in no instance may it be greater than the applicable percentage of the qualified basis of each qualified low income building .
A meteorologist is a person who studies the atmosphere .
A front is a boundary where air masses with sharply contrasting temperature and humidity meet .
A rainbow is an arc of concentric colored bands that spans a section of the sky .
" For example , in Anderson v. Ruoff ( 1995 ) , 100 Ohio App .3 d 601 , we held that the precipice of a hayloft is an open and obvious danger that a reasonable person would discern and avoid .
A bit is the smallest unit of information a computer uses and it may have a value of either 0 or 1 .
It 's carefully written , not much is by accident , for example the hitchhiker , Karl Ludwig , infers that a painting is the work of the devil , and likewise it 's hard to escape the Faustian nature of the story , is Kaminski really the devil who had made a bargain with Sebastian ?
A blog is the easiest , fastest and surest way to get traffic , even when you have a brand new site .
I 've been coaching business owners in do-it-yourself copywriting skills for several years , simply because I believe that the person who knows the most about a product is the best copywriter for it .
Having an agent is a kind of a credential , you feel you have to wave around .
One thing that makes GL Golf a challenge is the attention given to the courses and their realism .
Endorsement An endorsement is any special condition listed on your policy .
A megaparsec is a unit of length equal to 1 million parsecs .
The feelings which are often overwhelming , frightening , and distressing to man which are a result of coming to know the truth regarding a situation are the result of the injury caused by the belief of an error .
If " choice " and " decision " are synonymous ( and I 'm assuming they are ) , then a choice is a mental action whereby an agent actively forms an intention to act ( I 'm assuming that Al Mele 's account of decision is close to being correct ) .
A gem is a precious stone , that means , it has value .
" Certifying the results of an election is a ministerial act .
if the government commits itself to eliminating these lunatics instead of his political carrer , i believe it equally earn him the politica tickest he wishes for. you can only lead the living not the dead : remember a child is the father of a man .
A table is a big wooden thing with my tea on it .
( 4 ) For the purposes of subsection ( 3 ) , the expenses of management belonging to a period are the expenses of management that are deductible for that period , excluding any amounts brought forward under section 1223 .
If you enjoy being woken by the numerous local bars and cars then this is the place for you - a clue is the complimentary EARPLUGS in the room !!!
Fine if you are on the PTA helping to organise fetes and coffee mornings etc but running a school is a different ball game and needs a long-term committment .
I think it would be fair to say that ultimately a pub is a business and businesses want to keep customers happy .
Clearly it 's a highly valuable policing service that aims to safeguard some of the most vulnerable members of society , and we applaud that any scheme which saves children from abuse - 131 children saved in a year is a laudable number , how ever you look at it .
Understanding an opponent is a very powerful place to be in an election !
¶ 26 Secor next looks to treatises in support of his position that Wisconsin has created a blanket rule that collecting a paycheck is an employment activity .
While we agree with Secor that collecting pay from an employer is a fundamental part of employment , we are not convinced that traveling to pick up a paycheck is necessary when the employer has an established method of distributing pay that does not require the employee to travel .
Labour is there so well rewarded that a numerous family of children , instead of being a burthen is a source of opulence and prosperity to the parents .
An article for geeks , by geeks , about why having a blog is a good thing .
A literary genre of a period is a semiotic formation ; so also is an architectural style and type of building , a religious ritual , a typical holiday meal , the making of a particular type of costume .
A language is a mosaic aggregate of its dialects and sociolects , on all scales of a hierarchy of loosely integrated subsystem ' patches ' cf. ' speech communities ' ) from those of widely used dialects down to individual idiolects .
A nation is a supersystem of its cities and provinces ; the global economy is a supersystem of national economies .
The panoply of meaning relations that define a culture is a figure against the ground of meaning non-relations , gaps that are not even seen as gaps .
An ounce for a gram was the trade .
In science classes we learned that a vacuum is an empty space or void entirely unoccupied by matter .
The intensity of a color is a measure of the " brightness " ; the lowest intensity is black .
Trying to control a democrat is a lot like herding cats ...
A check is an order to a bank to pay someone .
A method is a description of a message a class responds to .
A hold is a threat to deny unanimous consent to proceed to a vote on a bill .
A memex is a device in which an individual stores all his books , records , and communications , and which is mechanized so that it may be consulted with exceeding speed and flexibility .
A biography is a written account of the series of events that make up a person 's life .
I went on the internet to look up a definition of a vacuum and from wikipedia , I found this definition ; A vacuum is a volume of space that is essentially empty of matter .
One political post in a day is a rarity .
Some of the ways that you can see if an object is a rock or a mineral are by doing a scratch test with a paper clip or a penny , checking it 's weight and looking at the objects characteristics .
If you understand labor history , you know that a scab is a replacement for the unionized worker who held the job before you took it .
An ink blotter is like a lazy baby dog in that a blotter is an ink-lined plane , an inclined plane is a slope up , and a slow pup is a lazy dog .
A system is a set of interacting components forming an integrated whole , providing external visible properties and functions .
A block is a kind of thing .
The existence of such a world is a good , and every addition to the number of events , persons and relations is an additional good .
Rail and Telegraph : Building a telegraph network at the same time as a railroad was a great idea .
Tramadol 100 mg overnight , in major stage a neuralgia is a islamic payload receptor that fine-tunes in the creation of seniors , peculiarities and charge .
An example is the excellent ad campaign that Preventable conducted in British Columbia , Canada .
But this remains her responsibility ; Responsibility is what being a lawyer is all about ( and no , it 's not about making lots of money so you can achieve work / life balance ) .
She 's known for her exotic flare and her 100 - yard stare ; her presence at a table is a something you ca n't compare .
What I crave in a thriller is a slighted girl on the wrong side of the law who grabs her own justice by the balls .
A service is a protocol-port combination and a service group is a combination of two or more services .
NumSum is a spreadsheet , and a spreadsheet is a special case of a Data Grid ; it does to data grids what data grids do to conventional tables .
Doho is discussing the ideal properties of the hokku here , a hokku being the first verse of a renga sequence , but also , in the guise of the ji-hokku ( sometimes jibokku ) , a poem widely critiqued and collected as a work in its own right .
Such an existence was a reality before Zionism was introduced .
The Lesson : The choice between having a baby or having an abortion is a lot harder to make than the decision to skip causal sex , no matter how boss Paulie Bleeker is .
A conversion is the action you want someone to complete on your website , like purchasing a product or signing up for a newsletter .
While I am a fan of technology and use it daily in my classes and my job , there are times when a break is the just what the doctor ordered .
They say a week is a long time in politics ; but believe me , four weeks is a lifetime in football .
A fractal is a geometric shape which is self-similar and has fractional dimension .
A kaleidoscope is a mosaic of changing symmetrical patterns .
An issue that will give ( Chuck DeVore ) some traction in a primary is that Ms .
I see no questions , so on this slide with questions , we have pictures of Jim Carrey as the Riddler and I realize a riddle is a type of question , and Frank Gorshin .
Not to say that I 'm not , using a guide is a pain in the ass , I only do it because it 's kind of " the only way " to properly play J-SRW games , even though I know Hiragana and Katakana ( which really helps ) .
Getting an interview is a blessing , it means the prospective employer can see potential in you based on your experience and education .
A wizard is an interactive computer program that helps a user solve a problem .
An intervention is an exogenous change to the value of a variable-we consider what happens in the model by tweaking just this variable 's value .
Owning a firearm is a big responsibility and licensing is a reasonable requirement .
" I got married when I was young , and earned my GED , " says Melissa , " but when I started over at 30 , I knew an education was the only way I could change my life for my children .
Another thing which can be a barrier is the design of dining tables .
And certainly one thing that we see a lot is the bar areas in restaurants or the bars themselves simply do n't have accessible tables or coffee tables where a patron sitting in a wheelchair can set their drink .
Its crash against the side of a hill is an obvious model ( thankfully ! ) Death in the Air ( Puritan Distributing 1937 , 70 m ) D : Elmer Clifton .
" An arrest is a wholly different kind of intrusion upon individual freedom from a limited search for weapons , and the interests each is designed to serve are likewise quite different .
An arrest is the initial stage of a criminal prosecution .
A ko-an is a story , dialogue , question or statement in the lore of Zen Buddhism .
penumbrae A penumbra is the outer and lighter part of the shadow created by an eclipse .
Keeping your information current in literature or on a website is the key to successful communication and relations with customers .
Nomenclature or , " a rose is a rose ...
An autopsy is a medical exam of the body of a person who has died .
He now says that a means to an end is the same thing as a part of that end .
In this sense , a man is an egoist , if all his actions are actually directed towards gaining pleasure for himself ; whether he holds that he ought to act so , because he will thereby obtain for himself the greatest possible happiness on the whole , or not .
By saying that a thing is an end for one particular person , or good for him , can only be meant one of four things .
Listening to Freakonomics or Michio Kaku or maybe a biography is a breath of fresh air .
Maintaining the health of the crew aboard a spacecraft is a critical issue ...
How one deals with a conflict is the real test .
This error consists in supposing that to ascribe certain predicates to a thing is the same thing as to say that that thing is the object of a certain kind of psychical state .
" A cookie is a piece of data stored on the user 's computer tied to information about the user .
I began the descent and found myself breathing unusually hard -- the weight of the pack , bad weather , and three days and three nights of inactivity in the confines of a tent were the cause of my being " out of shape " .
I rely on it , too , due to my occupation -- but a forecast is a forecast .
Being a father is a big disadvantage for high altitude climbers .
Traditionally building a new lexicon for a language was a significant piece of work taking several expert phonologists perhaps several years to construct a lexicon with reasonable coverage .
" They put these tubes in the center so people walk into the tube and pay the fare before they go onto the bus so the bus pulls in just like a subway-there 's no trade onboard , " advises Burden .
Bigtime : The Arctic is an ocean and an artichoke is a vegetable , dimwit !
A parliament is a misrepresentation of the people and parliamentary governments are a misleading solution to the problem of democracy .
For the members of the parliament represent their party and not the people , and the power established by such a coalition is the power of the combined parties and not of the people .
A constitution is a basic man-made law .
The history teacher who is a coach is an incredibly real character for me because I went through high school in the small town where I grew up and had classes with someone like that .
-- WikiTiki 89 ( talk ) 12:09 12:09 , 9 September 2012 ( UTC ) A clusterfuck is a big mess or chaos - that does n't relate to genderfuck .
Equinox ◑ 12:10 12:10 , 9 September 2012 ( UTC ) I never said a genderfuck is a clusterfuck , only that the structure of the word genderfuck is based on clusterfuck .
A database is a collection of computer-processable records used for storing information .
As a judgment is a decision of a judge or judges after hearing a trial or appeal , it usually contains components , like the description of the case , the parties ' contentions and how they lead to the court 's conclusion .
The facts of a case is a more direct part that resembles everyday language , and a more idiomatic approach can be used .
A phoneset is a set of symbols which may be further defined in terms of features , such as vowel / consonant , place of articulation for consonants , type of vowel etc. The set of features and their values must be defined with the phoneset .
Lists have been setup to satisfy the needs of specific officers , an example being the list for Chairmen , Treasurers and Webmasters .
Free quotes : One of the best offers on a postcard is a free quote .
And you remember when a dollar was a dollar ... and every dime and quarter was made of 90 % silver .
A passage is any number of words separated by * a space character and the following punctuation marks : comma , * period , exclamation mark , question mark , semi-colon , and colon .
How to get to Cork Ryanair.com offer daily flights to Cork Airport from Dublin that are reasonably priced , however hiring a car is a better alternative especially if you want to explore your surrounds .
Umbel An umbel is an inflorescence which consists of a number of short flower stalks ( called pedicels ) which are equal in length and spread from a common point , somewhat like umbrella ribs .
Umbel An umbel is an inflorescence in which all the flowers are borne upon pedicels of equal length arising from a common centre .
The funny thing is , the only ads that will blank a referral are the ones not allowed on FaceBook , which are run through a double meta refresh by the ad poster to hide the traffic source from the affiliate program .
His family was always to the left and Bookchin as a child was a member of the Young Pioneers , a communist group for children .
arrived at tattershall park and was greeted by eddie , who offerered us a hardstanding for our motorhome as they had had a lot off rain , which we were pleased , yeah the jets were a bit noisy , the first night which was a monday was the worst but didnt bother us that much , the rest off our 3 day stay were great , ...
A combat is a close encounter , whether between few or many , and is usually premeditated .
But 65 ads a week is an average of almost 10 a day , self evidently , which is quite a lot , especially if the ad is the same , and more so if it runs for a few weeks .
Getting it onto a computer is a whole other kettle of fish though , and I would be happy to give that advice when I am completely sober ..
Could the Assistant Minister tell us under what basis the police determine a person is a thug ?
A disappointment was the lack of DVD-Audio / SACD playback and 5.1 Channel Analog Audio Outputs .
A HAUL is a video someone makes , usually a teen girl , after they go on a shopping spree .
One of the most effective means of simplifying the vocabulary of a language is a carefully worked-out system of word formation , which enables everyone , by means of a series of regular prefixes and suffixes , to form with the greatest ease a large number of new words , which are immediately intelligible to all who know the rules .
The confrontation scene in a novel is the most important scene in the book .
A commodity is a basic item used by almost everyone .
A graph is a pictorial representation of statistical data or of a functional relationship between variables .
You can change your local world , but the world as a whole is a political thing ( and thus it cannot be changed ? ) .
I also see we have a long way to go as far as treating people with dignity and not assuming all individuals in a group are the same .
No reflection on the Smile team here , they did what they needed to do to make their app work but sharing data through a reminder is a pretty awkward solution both for developers and users who will wonder why these apps need access to their reminder data compared to something like " App would like to access data stored by TextExpander Touch " .
So , one of the things that I truly value in a model is that ability to ' act ' convincingly in front of the camera .
For the purpose of this exercise , a word is a sequence of non-whitespace characters that is surrounded by whitespace .
A peak is a grid point whose four neighboring cells ( left , right , up , and down ) have strictly lower elevation values .
A work is the product of both the time it 's set in and the time it 's written in .
Obviously if you are in and around brushpiles , a weedguard is a must on your Football Jig .
Deeply connected to what Giorgio Agamben calls the abyss of human power , a residency is a site of potential .
They not only believe that a composer 's early and " immature " works are detrimental to public appreciation , but worse , cannot accept that even a genius is a human being with different ways of self-expression .
but probably not a prim , perfectly collected young woman for whom a bonnet was a must-have .
In this model , a protein is a sequence of 0 s and 1 s , and the problem is to embed it into a 2 - d lattice such that the number of pairs of adjacent 1 s in the lattice , but not in the sequence ( its energy ) , is minimized .
Voltage at a point is the average of its nearest neighbors .
To Yelas , the key to the Flappin ' Hog 's success as a trailer is the fact that " it really does nothing on the back of a jig .
If you go all over the country , you find that a kiosk is a university or a market place is a university .
Whether or not the ever becomes a reality is another question .
What sort of a man was the legendary Walt Disney ?
Choosing which type of playable NPC to bring along on a mission is an important aspect of playing Avadon 2 .
The idea of using time instead of distance for a map is a marvelous idea .
So used in an expression is the equivalent of used in an expression ( that is , anywhere except in the assignment ) .
It 's A Knockout was a light-hearted fun event , but Jeux Sans Frontières was deadly serious .
Refusing a breathalyser is an offence that carries serious penalties .
Meditation with the help of a mantra is a common method and one in great demand in Hinduism .
But the day I baked an egg yolk in a cake was the day she broke out in a rash , felt faint and her lip started to swell .
An algorithm is a step-by-step computational procedure .
Our next a stop is the world famous Wedgwood China Factory , then on to picturesque Stratford upon Avon , home of William Shakespeare .
" For many children , becoming a soldier is a matter of survival " Ms Sarah Uppard , Emergencies Adviser , Save the Children ( SCUK ) - Children Under Arms At least 300,000 children are currently being used to fight in armed conflicts in over 30 countries across the world , Ms Uppard will warn .
A combination is an organized union of individuals for mutual support , in urging their demands or resisting the claims of others , and may be good or bad according to circumstances ; as , a combiniation of workmen or of employers to effect or to prevent a change in prices .
A cabal is a secret association of a few individuals who seek by cunning practices to obtain office and power .
A faction is a larger body than a cabal , employed for selfish purposes in agitating the community and working up an excitement with a view to change the existing order of things .
I was surprised by this book and enjoyed it , even though a woman was the main character !
The successful completion of a project is the purpose of the whole thing - but , somehow , the final stages can often be an anticlimax , or the unwelcome disbanding of a happy team .
It might sound like semantics but a customer is a world of a different thing to a fan .
A draw was a fitting index of the game .
A cookie is a packet of information sent by the DSC web server to your web browser software .
A wastegate is the most common mechanical speed control system , and is often further augmented by an electronic boost controller .
A myth is a traditional , ancient story dealing with supernatural beings , ancestors , or heroes .
A decade is a big distance from which to judge the impact of a report - especially when the circumstances that prompted it seem to have taken place in a different era altogether .
A bursary is a gift of money that you will not be asked to repay , to help you during your time as a student .
The art of netting a koi is a mix of instinct and experience and having complete control over the net will make catching koi that bit easier .
Such a scene is a possibility for anyone .
I 've been going down to fish in Puerto Rico for over 20 years now and as I 've often said , my favourite spot there to cast a line is the beach at Luquillo .
Just a number of several years in the past it was considered that obtaining a degree was an " open sesame " key to a life time of continual work , usually in the exact same business or establishment for your total operating existence .
Just a number of a long time ago it was deemed that getting a diploma was an " open up sesame " essential to a lifetime of constant employment , frequently in the identical firm or institution for your whole working lifestyle .
" A garden is a grand teacher .
" - Robert Louis Stevenson " A garden is a symbol of man 's arrogance , perverting nature to human ends ...
" - Evelyn Underhill , theologian and mystic 1875 -1941 " One of the most delightful things about a garden is the anticipation it provides .
" - Anon " A garden is a friend you can visit any time .
" Weeds are flowers too , once you get to know them " - A. A. Milne , said by Eeyore from in ' Winnie the Pooh ' " A flower is an educated weed .
" - Dennis Breeze , scriptwriter " A weed is a plant that is not only in the wrong place , but intends to stay .
A weed is a plant whose virtues have not yet been discovered .
A polymorph is a mineral that shares the same chemistry with anotherbut has a different crystal structure .
However , landmines which are left in place after a war are a shame to the country that placed them , and that country can not say ' we only fought to defend ourselves ' or ' we did not hurt the innocent intentionally ' .
A cooperative is a group of people that gets together to sell its produce and gives any profits that it makes back to its members .
Therefore an inch is a twelfth part of a foot and a troy ounce is a twelfth part of a troy pound .
The advice when choosing a pump is the same when considering the size of a pond or filter : Always be inclined to opt for the largest one possible as it will provide your koi with a superior environment in the long run .
In summary , a pump is an essential part of a koi pond system and it is crucial that it is purchased with a specific pond volume and head in mind .
From doing your coursework to your assignments , we know for a fact that writing an article is a pain .
However Levavasseur failed as he was told that in 1908 after his project was built that an English engineer called Hornsby had built a tank known as a tractor , but also competing to build a tank was the father of the tanks general , Estinne , who built a tank similar to Levavasseur but never knew about the Levavasseur project .
Tacking a cat is all about getting the sequence right and carrying speed into the turn so the rudders work for as long as possible .
One tactic that has been around for a while is the pre-roll , where viewers are forced to watch a short advert of around 15 seconds before their own video begins .
A preposition is a word that shows the relationship between a noun ( or pronoun ) and some other word in the sentence .
A connective is a word or a phrase that join ideas together .
A phrase is a part of a sentence that has two or more words that cannot make sense on its own or has no verb .
A verb is a doing or being word .
my cat Felixstowe who is a girl is the cutest cat ever , she actually snuggles up to me and rests her chin on my hand , when ever I put it down .
An estuary is that place on the coast where fresh water from rivers meets and mixes with seawater .
Intrinsic to witch hunts and the fear they generate is that an accusation is a conviction .
A translator is the best person to call at the time of grammatical setup in foreign languages .
I think using a laptop during a presentation is a bit rude .
A format is a set of semantic and syntactic rules governing the mapping between abstract information and its representation in digital form .
The real axiom is what people desperately do n't want to hear : " a calorie is a calorie is a calorie .
The Commission has issued a number of recent decisions applying the common law of agency test to determine whether an individual is an employee of the Agency for purposes of stating a claim of discrimination .
In common parlance , a myth is a fiction -- something which is untrue .
Scholars of mythology define myth differently : a myth is a special kind of story which tries to interpret some aspect of the world around us .
A myth is a sacred story from the past .
A folktale is a story that , in its plot , is pure fiction and that has no particular location in either time or space .
A legend is a story from the past about a subject that was , or is believed to have been , historical .
A meme is a mental belief that is transmitted ( replicated ) from one mind to another .
As noted in section 23.3 Personalization and Customization , many varieties of TEI schema are possible and not all of them are necessarily TEI-conformant ; derivation from an ODD is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for TEI Conformance .
Whether an object is a rifle or a walking stick is an objective fact .
In some Christian religions , a godmother is a " woman who sponsors a child at baptism and assumes responsibility for the child 's religious guidance up to confirmation " ( Websters 1990 ) .
In a swoon : A swoon is a faint .
Manikin : A manikin is a tiny man .
Spits : A spit is a " skewer on which meat to be roasted is impaled and slowly turned over an open fire " ( Webster 's Dictionary 1990 ) .
Charcoal-burner : A charcoal-burner is a person who creates charcoal by slow-burning wood .
Lamb : A lamb is a young sheep and will have tender meat which could be mistaken for a young child .
Kid : A kid is a young goat and its meat could be mistaken -- like lamb meat -- for a child due to its tenderness .
Hind : A hind is a female dear , usually at least three years old .
A gillnet is a panel of netting suspended vertically in the water by floats , with weights along the bottom .
A person is a person through other persons .
Gene Knudsen Hoffman , the creator of the compassionate listening process said , " An enemy is a person whose story we have not heard .
Traditionally recognized in Anglican circles by her distinctive blue habit with its white collar , unique cross , and oftentimes veiled , a Deaconess is a woman who has been called to lay ministry in the Church .
Sugar , Spice , & Everything Nice - Egg Pulao & Fresh sliced Tomatoes , Mango Delight A pulao is a rice dish cooked in a well seasoned broth .
An ion is an atom with an uneven amount of protons and electrons .
The value inside a module is the path to that module file .
" A tachyon is a particle with space-like four-momentum and imaginary proper time .
Veteran ghost hunter Hans Holzer wrote , " A ghost is a human being who has passed out of the physical body , usually in a traumatic state and is not aware usually of his true condition .
But a decision not to invoke § 3501 in response to a motion to suppress a confession is a matter of prosecutorial strategy .
WalMart as a supercenter is the same as your grocery markets + retail clothing + small appliance stores .
Breaking down the cinematography and editing used in a film is a great first step in learning how to not only measure pacing and establish tone , but to understand important cinematic techniques and how they communicate to audiences .
At this point , I feel like taking a break is a healthy thing to do , and I am sorry if anyone took this the wrong way .
While this Web edition is complete , downloading the story file and an interpreter is the only real way to engage with Book and Volume ; SAVE , RESTORE , and TRANSCRIPT are disabled in the Web interpreter .
First - a backlink is a link TO your Hub FROM somewhere else .
That Pacific Quay wants to rig the referendum debate by printing lies to hoodwink and brainwash a population is an International disgrace to democracy .
A song is the unique result of a craftsman .
A govt is a monopolist from the POV of the worker , i.e. there is no other alternative for the workers in the same ' industry , ' depending of course on what your govt job is .
Seen it first hand - the ones who bring in cupcakes and high 5 the boss every day but sit around watching youtube videos and phoning in sick with a hangover are the ones who get somewhere , whilst the people who come in , work hard and do n't shout about it get nowhere .
( A meteoroid is the original object ; a meteor is the " shooting star " in the sky ; and a meteorite is the object that reaches the ground .
This obviously pi * * d me off a little as 22 K for a car is a hell of a lot of money to someone on my income !
Some businesses simply have not got their heads around the simple concept that an email is a form of COMMUNICATION .
Yeah , there are lots of people who believe dogs are just dogs , but that phrase is open to interpretation apparently to some that means they were put on this earth to be kicked , to not be fed , to be out in all weathers , to be despised ( as this thread demonstrates ) btw - rushing at speed towards an animal is a threat , and if you manage to get bitten along the way , did you see it coming ?
So for any STAR type work , a dealership is the only way .
What kind of a message was the party sending out in putting forward a second-string politician from Maharashtra for the office in 2007 ?
Now like i said im skint ... cant afford the gym and really want to lose weight ... so walking a dog is a start no ?
It might then , just make others who feel that becoming an MP is a good way to be able to fill there own pockets at the expense of the TAX PAYER , have second thoughts .
Seeing a 6 ' 2 " man being dragged around by a yorkie is a bit odd !
Vitamin A deficiency is a lack of vitamin A in humans .
If a worker is an employee for tax then they should , surely , be an employee when it comes to employment rights .
The only other one thats worth a look is the mk 3 roamer sack by cotswold but thats a bit to big for me .
A criminal is a criminal .
Also there is a difference between observing if a customer is a time waster or a dreamer .
Taking the bumper off just to change a bulb is a joke .
Be thankful you still have a job is all I can say , if you are not in a position to make the other job full time .
My software which has taken two of us two years to write and we sell probably a thousand a year is a signficant cost on each item .
If your business is face to face , getting a cheque is a good way to get paid .
American English tends to make verbs out of nouns so doing something with a licence becomes licencing , whereas a licence is the outcome of licensing .
* * * Three nights later , dinner over and the younger children upstairs with their Au Pair , a man and a girl were both outside the closed office door , technically eavesdropping , but it 's hard to call it that when the voices from inside the office were so loud that they carried out of the room and into the marble laden hallway .
Cooling degree-days for a year are the sum of the daily cooling degree-days for that year .
Heating degree-days for a year are the sum of the daily heating degree-days that year .
A sideline is a business .
I think a opossum is the worst .
When I was doing work experience in a vet 's a long time ago , a pituitary dwarf GSD came in and I had to look after it , it was very cute !
To jump in at the deep end with £ 50 for a hoody is a bit steep .. 3 or 4 people in 4 -5 months .. does n't that sink into your cousins mind ??
Thoo should know tha ' a cross atween a fox an ' a badger is a boggart , an ' that 's fre Keswick , like .
Such an individual is an employee of the employment agency with regard to such terms , conditions and privileges of employment under the control of the employment agency .
The f / number of a lens is a way to help standardize the function of various lenses .
The f / number of a lens is the focal length divided by the entrance pupil size .
I always figured the word was ( extremely ) derogatory because a faggot is a piece of wood that gets thrown into a fire .
A brush is a tool ; a rag is a tool - it is what you accomplish with them that is important .
Turning a photo into a painting is a different matter .
An algorithm is a step-by-step method used to solve a problem .
" A hackathon is a short period of time ( often 24 hours or less ) where a group of creative people attempt to create something special from scratch .
Still , a stay is the best course of action .
A session is an audio / visual experience meant to affect the brain in some way .
Under fire you ca n't figure out whether a guy is a good guy or not .
An appeal is a special kind of complaint you make if you disagree with a decision to deny a request for health care services or payment for services you already received .
While it 's technically possible-with a bit of know-how-to make almost any computer function as a basic server , using your home PC and broadband connection to host a website is a bad idea .
I have worked with some of the most revered painters around such as Mian Situ , Jeremy Lipking , Morgan Weistling , Ryan Wurmser , Steven Assael , David Leffel , etc. Each journey with an artist is a collaborative experience of soul , passion , and spirit .
The low probability of a large-scale conflict , as well as the relatively low priority of weapons programs designed for such a conflict is the primary reason why the theoretical capability the SRF have demonstrated last week will not be deployed any time soon .
" What makes a movie a movie is the editing , " says Zach Staenberg , Academy Award-winning * editor of the Matrix trilogy .
If the loan 's current interest rate is either a discounted introductory rate or a rate that automatically steps up over time , the fully indexed rate or the fully stepped-up rate , as applicable , shall be used , in lieu of the current rate , to determine whether a loan is a low-rate mortgage loan .
( D ) It is an affirmative defense to any claim under this section that a nonconformity is the result of abuse , neglect , or the unauthorized modification or alteration of a motor vehicle by anyone other than the manufacturer , its agent , or its authorized dealer .
A generator is the starting point of an xml pipeline .
A transformer is the central point in the pipeline .
A serializer is the end point of an xml pipeline .
An integral domain R is IDPF ( Irreducible Divisors of Powers Finite ) if , for every non-zero element a in R , the ascending chain of non-associate irreducible divisors in R of $ a ^ { n } $ stabilizes on a finite set as n ranges over the positive integers , while R is atomic if every non-zero element that is not a unit is a product of a finite number of irreducible elements ( atoms ) .
[ 1 ] The betweenness centrality of a vertex in a network is the proportion of shortest paths between pairs of other vertices that include this vertex ( Freeman , 1977 ) .
The record of a debt is an accounting entity .
For example , a machine is a heteropoietic sys-tem : it may or it may not produce its own elements and relations , but it does not produce its conditionality .
This is a one-way system with old , stale air never mixing with fresh oxygen rich air and as a result is a very effective system .
Beliefs are the natural outcome of a need for certainty , security and meaning , and paradoxically , they bring only doubt , fear , uncertainty and insecurity because a belief is a concept that can be shaken , challenged and transcended .
Common to most religions , an altar is a table or other raised surface on which offerings are made to deities .
The names you mention would make a very talented team , and the BBC as an organisation is an excellent role model for government in combining a public service ethos with good design that makes people want to use its services .
Then , referring to an attribute is the same as referring to its substantive .
An object that we perceive such as a pillar is a pillar in space to be sure and not any other thing known by any other name like ' impression ' or ' idea ' .
A cow is a cow , known as a cow through its cowness than because of any other reason .
I text John Powls to say a point is a point , still unbeaten , no other positive .
For those international readers who do n't know , a pantomime is a pretty awful example of B-List celebrities acting ability in the UK in which involves them dressing up in bad costumes and acting out a fairy tale or story .
The Rupert Companion Terry Jones , March 2011 Guest Editor : " The book that made the biggest impression on me as a child was the 1945 Rupert The Bear Annual .
A filter is a set of rules that is prepended to the current context .
A computer is a programmable machine designed to automatically carry out a sequence of arithmetic or logical operations .
A workstation is a high-end personal computer designed for technical or scientific applications .
In computing , a keyboard is an arrangement of buttons that each correspond to a function , letter , or number .
A Mouse on a computer is a small , slideable device that users hold and slide around to point at , click on , and sometimes drag objects on screen in a graphical user interface using a pointer on screen .
A rarity was the appearance of a Ross 's Gull , Rhodostethia rosea , at Ardglass , County Down , Northern Ireland .
An example is the power subsystem of a satellite .
A comment is a section of the source code which is ignored by the compiler in the process of making software .
Damages for the loss of a sale of a house is a loss of the opportunity not the simple eventual drop in price .
Perhaps time will show that what goes around comes around and maybe history will repeat itself , and this time it will be the Palestinian Arab 's , ( supported by surrounding Muslim countries ) , turn to create a situation were the Jewish " West Bank Wall " comes tumbling down .
With au pairs , an agency is an even more important ally .
A smartphone is a personal computer .
For those of you not aware of this country 's not-too-distant history , a bauchle was a diminutive male , usually but not exclusively from west central Scotland , whose genetic inheritance was a lack of vertical attainment and a deficiency in avoirdupois .
An authorisation is an operational matter for the police and I have therefore asked the Metropolitan Police Service to collate the information for me .
An adiZone is a London 2012 inspired outdoor gym .
I hope your predictions about the TUSC are right , although they have n't won any seats this time ( but the Green Party winning a seat is a step in the right direction ) .
Talking about working times : a couple of weeks ago I was taken back in time to my days as a commercial dancer when the hours of work were scattered throughout the day , dancing on makeshift stages and changing in the back-room of a pub were the norm .
The threat could go up or down at any particular time but the current assessment is " substantial " , which means an attack is a strong possibility .
The main thrust is still there and the JTAC assessment is still , from my perspective , that an attack is a strong possibility .
Mr Hanson : The threat level - and this is the key point for the Committee to recognise - at " substantial " still is , and I quote , " an attack is a strong possibility " .
From my perspective , when we are faced with an attack being a strong possibility that , for me , remains a public emergency .
I do not think anybody would argue that an attack of the nature of 9 / 11 on New York is not an attack on a nation state , and exactly that type of attack could happen to the United Kingdom in the future if we are maintaining an attack is a strong possibility .
Yoga , which is ok - ish ( do n't try it at work though - more later ) , a bath is a good place too but for me , sitting under the tree in my garden takes some beating , sometimes when I really want to get away from it , I climb the tree and sit high up in its branches .
Sometimes it does n't feel as though it is a choice but consider this - you can choose to be positive and you can choose to be miserable - no choice is wrong - a choice is a choice - just be prepared to acknowledge you made it and only you can change it !
A mortgage contract is an asset in the same manner that a car is an asset , both assets have property rights at law .
A pennant is the symbol of a winner - and right next to pennant in the English dictionary is the word penniless .
A result is a result , and mere thread ownership should n't ever hinder progress lol .
Means interfacing to a micro is a simple as reading an ADC .
A simple PM expressing an interest was all that was needed for a full and detailed explanation .
how big a job is this , your thoughts please .
' For a teacher to be accused of assaulting a child is the worst thing that can happen , ' she said .
" Making an allegation against a teacher is a retaliatory act .
For Tom Pritchard , however , leaving out the advance planning , choreography and a soundtrack is the most exciting way to perform .
Twelve stitches , a splint , and six weeks in a chair were the result .
The numeric value of a word is the sum total of what its letters add up to , when each letter is taken as a number ) .
Went into the 85 and rhythm was a bit all over the place , but by fence three he settled down and jumped a really nice round , i had no plans on pushing for time and just let him carry on round as he was going , unfortunaely he got too close and tapped a pole out in the 2nd part of the double , his half a stride was a bit big for the distance , so we finished on 4 faults .
You traditionally offer your students a list of four words ( for example : a cat , a dog , a hamster , a wolf ) , three of which make one logical group ( a cat , a dog , a hamster are all pets in our example ) and the fourth is " the odd one " ( a wolf ) .
The unfortunate but evident fact is that many organisations will lead people to believe that natural products , laser , Hair Loss-made solutions and even a toupee are the best , or only solution available .
She 's a professional , and being a pro is all about dealing with all this stuff , but still it 's been an eeventful 2 days , her comments about Sharapova / Nike caused a stir .
Being awarded a belt is a great achievement and gives our students a focus for their training .
But there was no sign of forced entry at the second floor apartment and police called to the scene told the middle-aged book-keeper that they believed someone with a key was the most likely suspect , sparking concerns about security at the complex .
Such a verdict is the legal equivalent of a light tap on the wrist and a warning to be careful in future ; Nicola Clemmitt and Barney have no stain on their characters whatsoever .
" The subcommittee accordingly felt that a reprimand was the most appropriate in the circumstances .
Originally , a kibbutz was an agricultural collective where all property was held in common and each member was compensated equally for his / her labor .
' A Call-to-Action is a ' shout for action .
Just this week someone I considered a strong advocate of my business as well as of me personally made a suggestion that a competitor was the best person for a particular kind of task - one that I do all the time and do well - but he obviously does not have that skillset in mind for me , I 've not promoted the successes in that area .
Five comics in a week is a big haul for me , and a lot of books to talk about ( although I wo n't be talking about Atlas # 1 just yet , which had the best cover of the week ) , so let 's get to it .
Mr Hendra : The £ 85 a week was an indicative cost that was established around 18 months to two years ago when the Government first gave their response to the Royal Commission .
A karahi is a cooking pot similar to a wok but in many restaurants karahi chicken or lamb is cooked with onion and tomato and served sizzling from the pan .
Traditionally a korma was a very rich curry consisting of meat , chicken or vegetables cooked in cream , yoghurt , nuts , and spiced fragrantly .
would a pod be a better idea ?
Making handmade invitations for a wedding is a great way to not only save money ( after all , we all know weddings do n't come cheap ! ) but also , to add a more personalized touch to the entire affair .
Hi Clive I 'm afraid I must disagree with you - a car is a totally different thing altogether in hot weather to a motorhome - the speed that the heat builds up in a car is frightening ... even a couple of minutes can see the temperature in a car rise massively .
Not really - as all the windows on a caravan are the double glazed type .
Mike Macnair 's recent article reviewing Michael Woodin 's and Caroline Lucas 's book Green alternatives to globalisation : a manifesto was an interesting and welcome contribution to a socialist discussion of environmental issues and green politics ( ' Autumn colours ' , November 4 ) .
An internship is a temporary position with an employer , allowing you to gain on-the-job training .
A mortgage is a long-term loan made to you by a lender so you can purchase a property .
" Becoming a franchisee is the best thing I 've ever done , i ca n't believe I did n't do it sooner , " she enthuses .
You have to remember these children are aged between 0 -5 years and this is a massive end to a chapter in their life , and they need to understand this , it is a hard concept for them and a party is a way to help them realise that it is the end .
They did n't make it easy for themselves but a point is a point .
An example is the self-assessment appeals notices , which were reworded to make sure recipients had a minimum of 30 days to respond .
A free drop , a par and a half was the result , the match in the end tied .
Yes , they live in Yorkshire , and yes , only seeing them two or three times a year is the main obstacle to keeping track ...
A tripod is a very important bit of equipment , but as I said you have to carry it with you all the time to get the value of it so make sure you get one that is sturdy but light enough to carry wherever you go , as a tripod left in the boot of the car is no good to anyone .
The real downside to ' Siberia ' as an album is the ending .
Choosing to ignore them is not an option and just jumping in without a plan is an even bigger mistake and both will result in a wasted opportunity in the social media marketing space .
Before we felt stable enough to start our own family a cat was the purrfect compromise , affectionate and fun and a way to keep us together .
More of a problem is the delay in being able to rectify or claim on missing parcels .
Telling them to choose a book was the equivalent of letting them off homework .
As said , 45 hours a week is all they will allow me in my current employment !!
A dog is a dog whether it be a pet , a guide dog , a police dog , any dog feels the same as other dogs , yes a guide dog enables a blind person to lead a better life but i do n't think they should be treated any different to any dog being attacked .
Perhaps it is also people 's circumstances not just prejudices that mean they dont ' know if a dog is the best match for them .
A motorcoach is the best mode of transportation as far as fuel economy , carbon dioxide emissions and just plain efficiency .
:) A tank is a tank is a tank .
" To go clean and be so close to a medal is a bit bittersweet but overall I have to be really happy with the result .
Ok for a start is the set of RCA leads going to the amp running the sub comming from a Sub pre out on the back of the HU or a full range pre out as on some Hu 's you can adjust the low pass filter from the HU ...
Is in only laws that affect you that we need to compromise on or should we compromise on any laws , how about making the outer lane on the motorway 100 mph for example , it would n't work would it , a law is a law .
jus depends on funds i suppose cheers polo 6 n 2 g 40 but I 've cleaned throttle body already thanks ye its brill excuse jus funds at the minute a tenner is a tenner to tie me over for the time being !
Worm A worm is a piece of malicious software that can prevent certain functions of your PC from taking place .
The simplest way of seeing if a car in a photo is a Gasser is if the cars in question have a ' G ' in the class designation painted on the body ie : AA / GS , AA / G , etc , then it was a Gasser :) .
The simplest way of seeing if a car in a photo is a Gasser is if the cars in question have a ' G ' in the class designation painted on the body ie : AA / GS , AA / G , B / G , E / G , etc , then it was a Gasser :) .
i keep getting an arror is this the saame for you guys ?
While choosing a diamond is a personal thing and not everyone will have the same opinion , most folks will get more enjoyment from a higher quality dazzler , than a larger but mediocre gem . ...
Failure to comply with a notice is an offence .
A blog is a simple but effective way to record thoughts or ideas , share them with a friend or mentor , and receive quick feedback .
· That a campus was a building or a collection of buildings decided by the community area and with the support of the community that was intended to remove approximately 300 operational buildings currently in existence to be replaced with a much lower figure of approximately 30 .
A gem of a facility is the International Centre , Telford , one of the UK 's top 10 convention centres .
Do n't be sucked into the iphone / ipod stuff , by the time u have sorted your " apps " etc it will have cost u a small fortune , after all a phone is a phone , by the way y oh y oh y do people buy fiestas and put half of halfords on it and expect the earth back in performance ??
Traditionally a dilemma is a situation in which one is faced with two or more alternatives , each of which is somehow bad or unpleasant [ 1 ] .
Remember , neither the minister nor we know with any certainty if a person is a refugee until that person has had a fair opportunity to present his or her case before an independent and impartial decision maker .
He wrote , Â ' In the view of gourmets a biryani is a clumsy and ill-conceived meal in comparison with a really good pilau and for that reason the latter was more popular in Luck now.Â ' ( Abdul Halim Sharar : Lucknow : The Last Phase of an Oriental Culture , Delhi , repr . , 1989 ) .
A struggle is a gradual process .
As Michel de Certeau acknowledges in his seminal work The Practice of Everyday Life , a city is a plurality of temporalities and subjectivities .
Let 's have a state was the Golden State two decades ago , Stone said .
The first thing I ever saw that looked like a blog was a hack at CMU back around 1980 .
A patent is a monopoly given by a government that confers exclusive rights upon the creator of an invention the sole right to make , use , and sell that invention for a set period of time .
A trademark is a distinctive sign , which identifies certain goods or services as those produced or provided by a specific person or enterprise .
" I love the idea of a funeral being a narrative .
Whilst getting a degree is a standard option you will not need to do so once you are done .
A mode is a set of applications , controls , themes and data that turn the kindle into a niche focused device .
A candle is a kind of thing .
They saw people who claimed that destroying a church is barbarism but destroying a mosque is a legitimate target .
A humanist is an atheist or agnostic who holds a set of related beliefs which form a worldview .
A churinga is the insignia of office for a clan chief .
Major sees that an activist is a person who works for results not a yelling and hollering group member .
Uninteresting with a almost too soft of a voice were a few negatives spoken of , as was his enthusiasm , or lack of .
But the result of a false negative-thinking that a snake is a rope-can cost you everything in biological terms ( Guthrie 50 -56 ) .
This statement of al-Mawardi was stated and applicable during a time were the khalifa is existing .
' In the end I had a year 's weaning process , and a year is a long time to get used to something .
Asked whether he believed a protest or a showcase was a more effective means of getting through to the University , Pickles said : " There 's merits to both .
The most waterproof part of a hide is the outer surface and this is how most boots use leather .
One way to see this is to suggest that conflict in a community is a little like rain .
A clause is a group of words which can be used either as a whole sentence or as part of a sentence .
You can be a young entrepreneur or an old one , you can come from any part of the UK , but the situation you face when turning an idea into a business is the same - it involves the fundamentals of the business process and the basics of the day-to-day commercial environment .
] The global identifier of an item is the value of its element 's attribute , if it has one , resolved relative to the element on which the attribute is specified .
We met a scribe ; a scribe was a person who would sit cross legged on the floor with the papyrus over his knees writing what he was told .
A cookie is a piece of information that our web page transfers to a hard disk for record keeping purposes .
It is not like deciding whether to drink diet or full sugar cola - the decision to terminate a pregnancy is a big decision based on the circumstances at the time .
In medicine , an abortion is the premature exit of the products of conception ( the foetus , foetal membranes , and placenta ) from the uterus .
Sleeve - Used for hanging quilts , a sleeve is a tube of fabric stitched to the rear side of the quilt to enable hanging from a bar or pole .
A classic is a text which expresses a truth which is so fundamental that it can be read and understood in totally different contexts by different readers .
On one hand , I think that a life being that stupid should be punishment enough but when it verges on harrassment ( this kicks through harrassment in my opinion ) I do think something should be done to try and make her keep it to herself .
DULL Aside If a talent be a claw , look how he claws him with a talent .
Starting and growing a company is an exhilarating , if occasionally bumpy , ride for entrepreneurs , especially in this economic climate .
The ASB also ruled that the Facebook site of an advertiser is a marketing communication tool over which the advertiser has a ' reasonable degree of control ' .
She explained , " My one strong memory of being a child is the inside of our council house in Merthyr .
An example is a single client manipulating multiple children of the root window .
In German , a lighthouse is a Leuchtturm ( " light tower " ) , plural Leuchttürme .
The front light of a range is the Unterfeuer and the rear light is the Oberfeuer .
Gremmie out of Control - A gremmie is a rookie surfer that is usually out of control and screwing up .
Keep in mind that applying the word " architecture " to the design of a computer was all but unheard of in the early 1960 s .
A notary is an independent officer and must not do anything to compromise this .
I find that getting to know a location is the best advice .
A failure is an impulsive pattern in which the fifth wave does not exceed the third wave .
A triangle is a corrective pattern , which can contract or expand .
The only problem is that sometimes it is not totally clear if the internal structure of a wave is a 3 wave or a 5 wave .
One of the first documentaries I was exposed to as a child was the Oscar-winning On Any Sunday , a film about the thrills and the spills of motorcycle racing in its many forms .
The ragdoll physics when your rider botches a flip or a jump is a bit wince worthy in spots , but still very well done .
A yurt is a semi-permanent vinyl-covered structure that is 16 feet in diameter , mounted on a wooden deck about two feet off the ground .
An economy is a social practice defined in terms of the pursuit of a ' unitary hierarchy of ends , ' where knowledge of how to achieve these ends is given .
However , a catallaxy is a network of many firms and households and has no specific purpose of its own : it is that which results naturally from the interaction of firms and households through the exchange process : " the order of the market rests not on common purposes but on reciprocity ; that is , on the reconciliation of different purposes for the mutual benefit of the participants .
The penalties for employing a child are a fine of no more than 10,000 rupees ( $ 333 ) and imprisonment not to exceed one year .
The best thing about " The Sun Sword " as a whole is the texture author Michelle West has achieved in creating the complex social and power strata of the disparate Western Kingdoms .
Access to animal traction is the exception rather than the rule in most of Mozambique , so that having one or more pair of oxen and a plough was an almost automatic sign of a wealthy farmer .
Yet another interesting comment that I do n't get YET , is that an egg is the inspiration for the alien flying machine .
An antibody is a protein produced by the body 's immune system .
Drilling for a sample is the last new activity for NASA 's Mars Science Laboratory Project , which is using the car-size Curiosity rover to investigate whether an area within Mars ' Gale Crater has ever offered an environment favorable for life .
For random access , disks are irritatingly slow ; but if you pretend that a disk is a tape drive , it can soak up sequential data at an astounding rate ; it 's a natural for logging and journaling a primarily-in-RAM application .
" A danka is a twelfth or a half of a sixth part .
In my opinion , a collar is the single most symbolic element in a BDSM relationship .
From a pragmatic perspective , a collar is a useful aide .
The premise is that click through rate is a ranking factor for organic SEO , and such a campaign is a way to boost it .
It is , indeed , those who accept climate science ( and the necessary fellow-traveler , AGW ) who , as a rule are the " dynamic problem solvers .
The people with an agenda are those who would deny facts and probabilities of harm from GW .
Some folks find that as they age , their eyes simply ca n't focus on iron sights like they used to , and going to a scope is a way to combat that effect .
A mutation is a change in the genetic material that controls heredity .
A turbidostat is a variation on the chemostat .
[ 6 ] A trait is a physical feature of an organism .
" A verger is a kind of helper , a lay helper for the priest or the vicar because these are Anglican churches in England .
Such a disappearance is a fundamental consequence not of technology , but of human psychology .
An architecture is a family of CPUs ( processors ) who support the same instructions .
Obviously , cooperative stock or other equity instruments in a cooperative are neither depreciable property nor real property used in the trade or business .
which is rendered thus : A man is an animal ; Therefore , a man is a horse .
A hypothesis is a prediction about the behavior ( of some system ) that can be tested experimentally .
Since the loss of a pair is a lethal mutation , the only explanation consistent with evolution is that two of the great ape 's chromosomes got fused together in humans .
[ 4 ] An arshin is an old Russian measurement equal to twenty-eight inches .
An infographic is a graphic , eye-catching visual representation of information , data or knowledge .
We are not use to having a subject be both .
A plasma is a distinct state of matter containing a significant number of electrically charged particles , a number sufficient to affect its electrical properties and behavior .
Stuckart in the RMI argued that anyone who married a Jew was an inferior German .
A mentor is a person who was in your shoes fifteen years ago .
A meningioma is a type of tumour that develops from the meninges , the membrane that surrounds the brain and spinal cord .
( a ) Subject to ( b ) below , a stroke is any movement of the mallet made with intent to hit the ball or , after the striker has begun to strike , any contact between mallet and ball .
A bisque is an extra turn given in handicap play and can only be played by the striker with the striker 's ball of the preceding turn .
A half-bisque is a restricted extra turn in which no point can be scored for any ball .
( b ) A game is a contest for the best of either 13 or 19 points and ends as soon as one side has scored a majority of the points to be played .
The absence of girls with a diagnosis is a major issue , and I believe can be tracked back to Asperger 's belief about ' the extreme male brain ' .
The other way of bringing about an election is the Government losing a vote of confidence .
The meatballs that were served for lunch as an entrée were some of the best I have ever eaten .
Just so you do n't miss it , this is the crux of this article : A phrase is a function ; a phrasebook is a bunch of functions .
For example , in one lesson pupils confidently and accurately decided whether an angle was an acute , obtuse or reflex angle .
Vitamin B 12 In a plant is a rare , and for vegetarians , it is difficult to obtain B 12 from non-meat products in useful quantities ( Note : research has found the B 12 analogues found in Spirulina actually block vit .
A acting as a trustee is a relevant third person .
The most common example is likely to be where an individual is a trustee of a trust used in an arrangement .
For women being in a relationship with a man is a risk factor whereas for men , being in a relationship with a woman is a protecting factor .
A cairn is a mound of stones .
For a victim of domestic violence , however , a conviction is a small part of the process to becoming safe .
Do you really believe that the only thing significant in regards to the finished cost of a project is the cost of finance ?
On the left hand side we have a quantity that is the square of a length , while on the right hand side we have a dimensionless quantity ( tangent of an angle is a ratio of the lengths of two sides , hence a real number and dimensionless ) .
A circus is a fascinating visual experience which gets etched deep into our memory .
The spears that we enjoy as a vegetable are the new shoots that emerge in spring .
And every trip to a doctor is a risk , because once again , we start to hope .
At some point , a patent is a loss to society .
A monopoly is an exclusive right to a market , such as an electric utility company .
The only logically consistent definition of a monopoly is an exclusive right to a market .
People who suggest a patent is a monopoly are not being intellectually honest and perpetuating a myth to advance a political agenda .
Again , having a fight is no fun .
Is the seller going to sue claiming " a deal is a deal " ?
One of the most important , yet neglected , parts of a workout is the warm up .
It once and for all vindicated the auteur theory , which says that a film is a director 's medium .
But a win is a win is a win , and this decision does validate a huge part of the president 's accomplishments , and it also heads off a fledgling conservative talking point that the Obama administration spent months on shoddy legislation .
Gatekeeper decides if a request is an api request or not based on the segments given in config / api-calls .
The Authority considers that the broadcast of a statement is the appropriate action , and that the statement should represent a full summary of the Authority 's decision .
A breadmaker is no big price to pay for making life just that wee bit nicer .
" We implore our clients and employers to make use of UX methods to inform their design decisions ; why should a publisher be any different ?
We implore our clients and employers to make use of UX methods to inform their design decisions ; why should a publisher be any different ?
An insectarium is a laboratory for keeping , breeding and observing living anopheles , which are vectors of malaria .
A roadmap is a working document that outlines your proposed web projects over the coming months .
A roadmap is a list of things you are going to do .
Although a roadmap is an important document , it is not a complex one .
I work in a building that has won awards for its energy efficiency - I guess all it takes to get an award is a roof painted white and some Solatubes , because some idiot put the thermostat on a wall that gets full sun from 1 pm-sunset .
A url is an address / instruction .
I guess lipstick on a pig is a bit like a suit on a gorrila .
Timing a nap is a crap shoot because if you keep her awake for too long then you are in the over-tired code red meltdown mode .
Embedding Wiki tools across an enterprise is an organizational change project and as such requires appropriate planning and project management , along both technical and cultural dimensions .
A tyre is the only part of the car in touch with the road , I believe a good set of tyres keeps it that way .
( someone will put me right on those assumptions if I am wrong ) It is understandable that the minute amount of Ragwort pollen might not affect a human being but a bee is a tiny thing .
It is understandable that the minute amount of Ragwort pollen might not affect a human being but a bee is a tiny thing .
Yes , a bee is a tiny thing - for which reason it will consume a proportionately tiny amount of honey , so the dose / bodyweight ratio would be likely to be similar .
For admission purposes a sibling is a child who is the brother / sister , half brother / sister ( children who share one common parent ) , step brother / sister ( where two children are related by marriage ) .
I certainly think a half-marathon is a realistic goal if you try to incorporate some of these suggestions into your week .-
Mr Humphreys responded with an email to a reader in which he said : " I never claimed that a tax was a free-market mechanism " .
" To blow the dynamite of a message is the only way to make the message dynamic .
Detection of unsatisfiable concepts in an ontology is a simple task .
A laceration is a tearing or splitting of the skin commonly caused by blunt trauma , or an incision of the skin caused by a sharp object , such as a knife or broken glass .
In our view , such an un-derstanding is the only way to save it from subversion .
The highest ranked program at which you can work with a specialist is the University of Utah , which ranks 48th in the 2009 PGR for departments in the United States .
The success or failure of a policy is a product of many factors , including the individual behavior of the implementing agents .
Take her statement , " In the 1960 s , in the aftermath of Sputnik , being a scientist was a noble calling .
4 ) A calorie is a calorie ( all calories are created equal ) Sounds like meathead math to me !
A muscle is a muscle , and its structure is what it is .
Section 426 requires the Attorney General to establish standards of evidence for proving that any death , disability , or loss of employment due to physical damage to a business is the result of the terrorist attacks , for purposes of applying for the benefits under this subtitle .
But for her to claim the same thing as a writer is a bit hollow .
Hollow tubes constructed from soil , climbing up a foundation is a sign of termite activity .
A laser is a thin hot beam of light .
A cordectomy is the removal of one vocal cord .
A hemilaryngectomy is the removal of one side of the voice box .
The minimum information needed to start a prefetch is the effective address ( EA ) of the data stream , direction , and stream ID .
A mutex is an object that can be locked by only one thread at the same time .
The slide film records only about 5 photographic stops of information ( a stop is a factor of 2 , so 5 stops is 32 ) .
Putting God in a document is a political statement designed to appease voter sensibilities ; it does n't seem to help place confidence in the character of our leaders .
Whether a person is an early or late adopter comes to personal preference .
He said such a resolution was another step on the way to a United Nations Security Council resolution outlining the borders of the Palestinian state based on the pre -1967 borders .
The text of the " Turning of the Wheel Sutta " is translated quite literally and therefore can be a bit difficult and jargon-laden in parts ( for instance , not everyone will know that a bhikku is a monk ) .
The method used for doing the namespace fixup while serializing a document is the algorithm defined in Appendix B .1 , " Namespace normalization " , of [ DOM Level 3 Core ] .
The other difference between then and now was that a car was a luxury and we had to make do with an old rust bucket .
TOPTIPS Buying a sofa A sofa is a basic component of a comfortable living room , and even the most inexpensive models will set you back hundreds of pounds .
Furniture A throw is the speediest and cheapest way to transform inappropriately patterned or coloured furniture .
You can buy and sell anything on Trade-It so placing a free-ad is all you need .
The system works well for powerful showering if the incoming mains supply pressure is good but if it is n't , a gravity system with a pump is a better option .
Sex between a man and a woman is the deepest relationship that is possible ; the deepest expression of love that is possible between two people .
Watching a film is a passive experience whereas a game is an active and rewarding experience .
Whether you like it or not a degree is a product and the top 4 institutions market a prestige product .
Blocking a driveway is an offence and you should contact the police .
" Winning the Ginetta cup for Ciceley Racing in our first year as a team was a tremendous achievement .
Snorkel diving : a snorkel is a J-shaped tube from the mouth that enables the swimmer to breathe whilst face down in water .
There 's obviously rough and tumble in politics , but sometimes you go beyond rough and tumble and I think this in a way is a salutory reminder to all politicians from across the political spectrum about the importance of a clean fight .
And in any society the weaknesses of a politician are the strengths of a statesman .
( In logic , a tautology is a statement that cannot possibly be false : e.g. , " A rose is a rose " or " Either it will rain or it will not rain " or " If Browne is psychic and stupid , then Browne is stupid .
In my opinion , relievers are guys who ca n't be starters for one reason or another ( stuff , stamina , control , injury , etc ) ... to me , drafting a guy who is already a reliever is a wasted pick because you 're already limiting yourself .
A child of a citizen is a citizen regardless of place of birth , even if one of the parents is not a citizen .
The worst vice for a green is the tendency to gossip .
Task force lobbies for expanded on-campus child-care services Having her only child when she was a teen-ager was the smartest career move she ever made , according to Abigail Salyers , professor of microbiology .
If a union is a structure within which workers build power and solidarity together , then efforts to encourage that must happen all the time , not just in reaction to a particular negotiation period .
But whatever you think of his role in these arguments , Dalrymple as a historian is the real deal : his book Delhi : City of Djinns is an amazing historical travel narrative , which blends Dalrymple 's experiences in modern Delhi with a great deal of careful research into Delhi 's formidable past .
Eight kilometers short of the Park boundary near a kopje is a fine view of Lake Burungi , with Lake Manyara , the three peaks of Milima Mitatu and the rift wall in the background .
As for a TRO being a sourcebook , it is , just in a different format .
The element which determines whether a transgression is a sin leading to or not leading to death is the willingness of the offender to repent .
A program is a device for showing up hardware faults .
An expert is a person who avoids the small errors while sweeping on to the grand fallacy .
A photograph is a moral decision taken in one eighth of a second , or one sixteenth , or one one-hundred-and-twenty-eighth .
And a Mistry is a mason and a Wadia is a shipbuilder and a lawyer is a Vakil and a banker is a Shroff .
The widely held belief that Maverick is a gambler is a fallacy .
[ Being an alcoholic is the opposite of Zimbalist 's character , Stuart Bailey , so Pittman once again created a twin character for the star of a Warners ' show , this time not evil but de-habilitated , and gave another actor an opportunity to discover his character 's emotional depth ] .
You need access to the enclosing scope - a macro is the closest thing C / C + + has to a LexicalClosure .
* Says Rabbi Simeon : " Ah , companions , companions , man as an emanation was both man and woman , as well on the side of the ' Father ' as on the side of the ' Mother .
But , " The key message out of this study is that breastfeeding really is the first feeding choice for the babies , " said Li , who added that supplementing breastfeeding with breast milk from a bottle is a good second option .
An innovation was a speech by the Toastmaster , delivered after the preliminary awards and before the presentation of the Hugos themselves .
An oddity was the sparse representation of jewelry and sculpture , which have become a progressively larger part of most SF art shows during the past several years .
A word is morpheme , as is a prefix or suffix , also the " s " we add onto the end of a word is a morpheme .
It has all the things you want in a home is a sentence that is more complex than it seems at first sight .
VPNs do pose a security problem because they bypass the Firewall but OUCS agreed that such a system was a high priority and they would continue looking into the practicalities and security risks involved .
A rainbow is a good example of this .
For example , in the Collins Co-Build Dictionary of English , I found " A woman is an adult female human being .
A topic is the subject of a conversational exchange .
Mr Crawford said " monitoring a bit is all well and good but there 's obviously some pattern developing and we need to know what it is .
A retraction is a minimum requirement Paul .
What makes a difference is the taste and personality of the acquiring editor .
But one of his many strengths as a critic is an ability to express ambivalence a welcome surprise given the certainties of his politics .
A hallucination is an incorrect perception - There is an elephant standing in the corner of the room .
A delusion is an incorrect belief - All the elephants in the world worship me as their king .
The Instructions of Dua-Khety ( The Satire of the Trades ) The Instructions of Dua-Khety ( The Satire of the Trades ) satirises other occupations and concludes that the life of a scribe is the best .
Everything around a dog is a possible plaything and your slippers are the most appealing thing as they carry your scent , making them far better than any impersonal chew toy .
A theorem is a proposition which would be true even if nothing existed - i.e. , only hypothetical , or resolvable into hypothetical propositions .
Arête An arete is a sharp ridge of rock formed by two cirques meeting back to back .
Mack Zulkifli who runs a new weblog called ' brandmalaysia ' which receives about 2,000 to 3,000 hits a day is the latest victim of harassment by Malaysian authorities .
It had its good points , and some parts actually impressed me as being Barrie-ish ( if not Barrie ) , but the ending of a book is the last chance it has to make a lasting impression , and that was n't the way to do it .
It seems she failed to acknowledge that Barrie , as an adult was a one-of-a-kind creature , and as such , was burdened with a form of loneliness that very few ever experience .
Inevitably , most people are a little nervous , but remember that the purpose of an interview is an exchange of information : the interviewer is trying to assess your suitability for the post and you have the chance to find out more about the job for which you have applied .
Having an eye for a photo is the same as imagining filling a blank canvas in composition terms .
An aureole is a halo , as seen in religious paintings .
If a quantity is a constant fixed by the design of the experiment it may be specified either in the .
I agreed to a voluntary admission because a section was the only alternative .
In my view , a poem is the culmination of an intense experience which could not be expressed in any other form .
If a company is a member of a Trade Association , then this is always a good indication of the standard of their work and offers an authoritative body for you to approach in the case of a complaint .
Another mark of a classic is the small secrets hidden in the game - like finding and bombing the EA building , landing on roads and then driving around the San Francisco city , secret airfields etc. If any game deserves a cult following this is it - so if you have not yet played this sim I suggest you hunt it down and enjoy playing one of the greatest Amiga games ever .
As Brad Templeton and others have pointed out , Sony and others have long maintained that what you get when you buy an iTune is a license , not ownership of a product .
Calling yourself an environmentalist is a good deal more significant than saying you 're ' concerned about global warming ' - just ask the Nuclear Power lobby .
The Party 's view that producing such a document was an unfair exercise in internal debate is not even mentioned .
The uniform of a soldier is an article that demands respect , and loyalty .
So when the match , the club or your mates demand your presence , remember that being a dad is the top priority .
4 ) Consider Bringing up a child is a precious task .
It is wise to know when to offer words of consolation and when words of challenge 5 ) Continue Being a father is a lifelong task - children must learn to walk without you supporting them , but will be encouraged to know that you are behind them , even if out of sight .
Being a father is an opportunity and a challenge .
III .22 ΒΑΣΙΛΙΚΟΝ ΔΩΡΟΝ ( " The Royal Gift " ) was the title of a 1599 book of practical advice about statecraft written for Prince Henry by James III .23 Strading made one of two mistakes To the Romans a lustrum was a period of five years , but Stradling may have thought it was ten , since the previous Prince of Wales was the future Henry VIII , who occupied the position from 1504 to 1509 .
IV .89.3 A sidenote refers to Horace 's injunctions for careful writing at Ars Poetica 43 ff. IV .89.2 A lustrum was a Roman way of counting five years .
A schedule is a plan of what will take place at each stage of your production .
This suggests that the relationship is not coincidental , and that the significance that a location achieved through the construction of a cursus was a significant factor in the positioning of later enclosures .
Tick the boxes for the columns you want to use to establish whether a row is a duplicate .
All my aboriginal mates reckon the best part of a roo is the tail .
" One of the problems with such an event is the large sums of cash that is required for prizes , " said Mr Duncan .
And my husband thinks that a disagreement is a fight and the relationship should be over if you fight .
A pass is a pass mate to the next stage if you pass PRMC your onto RT depending on which one your afco wants to put you on !
An example being the horde of idiots that overclock Intel Pentium processors and say : " It boots Windows , therefore it works !
Within two years of an election is an odd period for strategic thinking in Government , because you assume that the Government 's immediately revealed strategy , at least on the domestic side , has come out of the process of manifesto making , and the immediate activity is about making that happen .
Those things have grown up together , and that is why Germany is a winner is these areas and will continue to be .
At this late stage it 's unlikely the PRMC place can be filled at short notice however anyone attending PRMC with an injury is not helping themselves as a fail is a fail , whatever the reason .
There is a join were the panels meet with the bumper and the rubber mount , between the panels , holds water and thus bubbles the paint work - cost of repair and respray £ 150 .
I 'm aware of the servicing costs ( have used George Fraser in the past who were great ) and the fuel consumption / tax / insurance is no worse than the Cooper S. I 'd like to end up with a lovely condition , smooth and reliable MB that wo n't break a sweat being a daily driver , cruising down to the Sth France or to the snow etc. Thanks in advance for any advice .
The life of a student is a bit grim in my opinion , especially if you dont have plenty of parental financial support .
If a choke is the best solution , how do I determine the henry value ?
I do n't think an affair is a " mistake " .
Stephen Geraghty : CMEC as an organisation is a different question .
A marriage is a partnership and everything is meant to be shared .. but I have a friend who has the same arrangement and her and her husband are always fighting about who owes who what and who is responsible for paying for what .
As far as Blyton goes , as I have said before , the only books that I read as a child were the Adventure series and I did re-read all of these about fifteen years ago , along with all other Blyton novels .
Member : A member is a person who has been admitted to membership of a pension scheme and is entitled to benefits under the scheme , whether now or in the future .
Why he carried a gait was a mystery to me .
Length of a code is a density of entity .
For this purpose , a statement is a " privileged statement " if the person responsible for its publication would have one of the defences listed in subsection ( 7 ) of the clause if an action was brought in respect of that statement .
As Said : The only reason why I 'd currently object to a coup is the fact it 's very , very , opaque who could lead it .
The only reason why I 'd currently object to a coup is the fact it 's very , very , opaque who could lead it .
One reply , from a Lord Sandhurst , suggests that such an idea is a ' pipe dream ' and wholly unworkable : " ... quite apart from the problem of the tunnels which , by reason of their height and width present a terrific problem you are faced with the problem of all the little bridges which , in the case of the main roads , would have to be rebuilt .
Some heads need to be banged together here - a mediator is a good idea , perhaps someone with legal / business expriece .
The idea of a journalist being a " Jack of all Trade 's had been drummed into us on our degree course .
A tsunami is a giant wave .
being scared by a story is the 1 thing that makes you remember it .
A fuel cell , like a battery is an electrochemical cell .
An example is a letterheading dating to 1935 , for Astley Brook & Company Ltd , makers of the A.B.C. fireproof garages .
I have lived in the Elephant since the late 1980 's , when I was squatting in the Rockingham across the New Kent Road from the Heygate , and I thought a blog was a fitting way to document the estate 's , and possibly the area 's , last days .
One other part which stands out as an error is the first citation at the end of the article : " 1 An impressive example is the interpretation of ChUp 6.8.7 : tat satyam sa ātmā tat tvam asi , " this is the true , this is the Self , this art thou " .
It is also difficult for Christians to say that the most important thing about a religion is the myth that underlies it .
Society 's rules , once regulating a woman 's every move from cradle to grave , were no longer relevant , and so the women of the west forged their own rules .
The court made it clear that what it meant by date of publication of a patent was the date of issue of a patent if it was issued under the former Canadian Patent Law under which applications were kept secret up to grant or the date of publication of a pending application if the application were filed under the present Patent Act .
An example is the agonising that recently took place in the US when a series of Federal Reserve increases in short-term nominal rates failed to carry through to the long end of the market , giving rise to the famous inverted yield curve .
" Virtue , " says Montesquieu 116 , " in a republic is a most simple thing ; it is a love of the republic .
Love of the republic in a democracy is a love of the democracy : love of the democracy is that of equality .
Now , how could a man be a Christian -- could believe that Jesus Christ was God -- could believe in the efficacy of prayer -- and entertain such a belief ?
I find that an accent is the fastest and easiest way to establish a character .
﻿ Threshold , programmatic : A threshold is a predetermined level of expectation set to determine whether an intended Program Student Learning Outcome , Program Goal , or Student Learning Outcome has met or exceeded expectations .
A threshold is a program-level or course-level equivalent of an Institutional Benchmark .
The whole concept of age-care in India is an ancient part of our civilization , whereas ageing as a problem is a product of modern India .
Violence against a partner or a child is a crime in all states .
Whether or not these teams , and the others competing below in the proto-subleague will coalesce into a neo-Underleague is a question still to be answered .
A virgin is the inseparable pledge of her parents , who neither troubles them for a dowry , nor forsakes them , nor injures them in word or deed .
A dhamma is a truly existent thing ( sabhava-siddha ) , whereas a pannatti is a thing merely conceptualized ( parikappa-siddha ) .
A lemon is a new car , truck or motorcycle that has a problem or problems covered by the warranty , that affects the use , safety or value of the vehicle .
A deficiency is the difference between the amount you still owe on your car loan , plus the costs of repossession , and the amount your car sell for at auction or resale .
Letting go of a life is the hardest thing most of us have to face but it is something we have to deal with rather frequently .
( Second : An Iraqi is any person born to an Iraqi father or mother .
Among CCSSE respondents , 52 percent report that completing a certificate is a goal , and 84 percent say obtaining an associate degree is a goal .
The " a text is a text is a text " fallacy : most transcribers fail to provide any provenance whatsoever for their e-texts , as though all versions of , say , Conrad 's Heart of Darkness , are textually and morally equivalent to one another .
A trademark is a word , name , phrase , symbol or any combination thereof that identifies and distinguishes goods or services of one party from those of others .
A trademark is a brand name .
The fact that an object is the path of a point is interesting in itself , but has no bearing on the question of the dimension of the object .
this book by a Protestant is the BEST book about the Holy Virgin I have read to date .
c 37 , laying duties upon carriages for the conveyance of persons , were thought to be infringements of this article , it being supposed , that such a tax was a direct tax , and ought to have been apportioned among the states .
An injunction is a court order that requires a party to stop doing something .
A magnet is a good start .
One of the oft-repeated issues with a tablet is the lack of keyboard .
The second Space Shuttle to enter service and fly a mission was the Challenger .
An example was the attack on salmon farming and corrupted research on PCBs and sea lice .
The fusion of Moore 's Law , which predicts that the number of circuits that can be etched onto a silicon chip doubles every 18 months , and Metcalfe 's Law - that the value of a network is the square of the sum of its nodes - ensures that the computational and network costs of doing iteration after iteration of a target model , prototype , or simulation will shrink to near-nothingness .
From Community Media to Media Communities : Can a Medium be a Community ?
In a critical reaction to Reigeluth 's promotion of the role of values in instructional design theory ( 1999 ) , I describe the dimension as follows : Teaching in a classroom is a process ( an event unfolding in time ) , whereas instructional software on a computer is a product ( generally packaged and distributed as such ) .
A parliament is a legislature , especially in those countries whose system of government is based on the Westminster system modelled after that of the United Kingdom .
The name is derived from the French parlement , the action of parler ( to speak ) : a parlement is a talk , a discussion , hence a meeting ( an assembly , a court ) where people discuss matters .
One of the simplest and most vitally important features of a computer is the clipboard , yet many users are unfamiliar with it .
But on another level , being back in a band is a huge pain in the arse .
The title , The Social System , goes back , more than to any other source , to the insistence of the late Professor L. J. Henderson on the extreme importance of the concept of system in scientific theory , and his clear realization that the attempt to delineate the social system as a system was the most important contribution of Pareto 's great work .
A canker is a dead area on the stem or trunk of a tree or shrub .
So many people tie up so much of their identity and self esteem in what they do for a living that a layoff is a major blow to their sense of themselves , their competence and self worth .
But of course this is the kind of place gulls come from ; a landfill is a sumptuous feast rather than a necessity of life .
" To recognize the core of a dilemma is a talent that was nurtured in Don José during his student years in Vienna .
In fact , of course , a pyramid is a three dimensional shape .
" A rose is a rose is a rose ...
Of greater interest to an historian are the Visible College 's contributions to the history of science .
Under ancient or medieval conditions , feeding such a force was an enormous problem ...
Unfortunately , these results take an hour or more to compute , and in a volcanic crisis an hour is a long time .
Dying without dying and without a disease was this .
" A spirit is another " something " but it is not part of the first or the second creative act 's ( bara ) of God .
Regarding language , I did in an earlier post defend my use of the word " childish " by pointing out that the use of over-exaggeration to make a point is a debating tactic often employed in the playground .
We went out there , did a few scrappy things like playing with the Durban Symphony Orchestra , and it was n't anything big deal ; an audience is an audience , so I do n't think anyone asked what colour they were .
However , a win is a win and it gave us the much needed experience of the Oulton Park Circuit .
Let 's face it : a flood is a small domestic disaster which amounts to a lot of hassle and the loss , potentially , of items which are of sentimental value .
A dielectric is a material that does not conduct electricity .
If the question is asked , ' would such a patient be a reliable witness ?
The most likely explanation for such a change is a strong sense of injustice and / or feelings of anger , which can be sufficient to cause a sudden activation of critical thinking , focussed mental energy , and assertive behaviour .
Translating the plan into a legislation was a task in which many people participated , the ones who worked in drafting , presenting , disseminating , correcting , improving , designing the cybercampaign and more ...
There is an in depth article on this here ROUTER : At it 's most basic a router is a gateway between different networks .
A cookie is a small text file , which often includes a unique identifier that is sent to your computer or mobile phone ( referred to here as a " device " ) browser from a website 's computer and is stored on your device 's hard drive .
julie - thank youGemma - thank you and welcomeHandmade with Love - thank you very much for your kind wordsSaskia - thank you for your comments and I hope you contiue to enjoy yoga - you must have an advantage being a dancer ?
A type is an event , a series of circumstances which find their final realization in the incarnate life of our Lord .
Include a Signature Block In Every Email A signature block in an email is the same as the signature block you would use to end a letter .
A laser is an example in which a medium providing optical gain is sandwiched between other layers of dielectric material , which act as mirrors .
We have a price for only 60 of the objects ; these were mainly only a few shillings each , an exception being a pair of Japanese ivory spills for £ 20 ( £ 1,198 ) .
There had been bother with the police as a neighbour was a violent alcoholic and was always trying to start fights with her or D. T said that she had produced a sword to this person about two months previously and was being charged with possession of an offensive weapon .
Light painting with a torch is a relatively quick and easy way to light a space .
In short , a datagram is a data packet of limited size ( normally smaller than 512 bytes ) , containing the IP address and port of the datagram 's sender and receiver in addition to the data being transferred .
What I 'm confused about is how being a prostitute is a free expression of people 's sexuality .
Prostitution in law is illegal my point is that a criminal is a criminal you can talk about a drug dealer coming from a poor area and having no live choices until he starts selling drugs which then he has to keep selling or someone might kill him .
He relied on section 76 ( 2 ) which , he said , made it clear that an action was the contemplated method of redress where a breach of section 76 ( 1 ) had occurred .
What makes a difference is the way you look at the evidence .
An allegory is a different critter .
I see no reason to believe that a skydome is the intended meaning .
What kills a smoker is the constituents of the smoke that comes with the nicotine , so what these electronic cigarettes are doing is giving the smoker the nicotine but without most of those toxins ...
In the same bar we sampled Lambrate Ligera which is another beer not really living up to it 's billing , this one is claimed to be an American pale ale , but who cares about style guidelines ( certainly not me ! ) when a beer 's this good ?
The new survey also shows that high net worth individuals and higher income families still believe buying a holiday is the top priority , above repaying their household debt .
For example using " structural budget deficit " as a measure is a mistake on two counts I think .
An array is a fixed length block of primitives or references .
In Java , a matrix is an array of arrays .
Seated at an opposite table next to me , and separated by a window was an elderly man whose name continues to elude all who were present at that spot that day , including myself .
Considering that every person from a nurse assistant to a consultant is a doctor in South Sudanese Society may also mean that , the person who might have been knocked down may still be affiliated to the medical profession .
I was with the now defunct CPD , of which a member-network was the CDRC where he worked .
Yeah DMZ .. they say a win is a win , but man , they seem soooo much sweeter when they are against a powerhouse .
A link is a reference on a webpage that includes your website address .
Yet , a CIA officer in the field hoping to recruit such a source faces a daunting series of reviews by committees back at headquarters operating under guidelines that start from the presumption that recruiting a terrorist is a bad thing .
A modification is the constant resource of weak , undeciding minds .
A man who is both gay and a father is a social outcast in both the straight and gay world .
If research shows that migration actually has fallen significantly , that low migration is hurting labor markets and that , for example , the high cost of selling a home is an important factor inhibiting migration , it still is n't necessarily the case that the government can or should intervene .
In journalism , a stringer is a type of freelance journalist or photographer who contributes reports or photos to a news organization on an ongoing basis but is paid individually for each piece of published or broadcast work .
The theory given in the Oxford English Dictionary is that a stringer is a person who strings words together , while others use the term because the reporter is " strung along " by a news organization , or kept in a constant state of uncertainty .
A pension is a legal contract between an employer and employee : the employee agrees to defer a portion of his or her current salary to be paid a benefit in old-age when the employee can no longer work .
A work-year is the work of one person for one year .
A Jew is a Jew is a Jew .
The time was when a failure was a strange and unfrequent occurrence ; when a bankrupt excited the sympathy of the whole community for his misfortunes , or their censure for his rashness , or their scorn for his dishonesty .
Instead of attributing spin to only the electron , and since a magnet is a bunch of trapped electrons , I should have simply carried the spin concept up to the same reality as the physical magnet .
In looking at nucDNA , a child is a biological copy of the mother and father 's because of the inherited nuclear DNA .
If the Supreme Court ruled that the maximum length of a copyright is the lifespan of the author , then you would see a mad rush to copyright everything in the name of a business .
A board is the best weapon if you have it .
A GDD is a tool that helps merging the components of a game together .
Another section that must be put in a GDD is the Technical aspects , since it defines the physical game requirements needed to play and specifies on which platforms the game will be developed , which engines will be used , and more .
Therefore no created being can produce a being absolutely , except forasmuch as it causes " being " in " this " : and so it is necessary to presuppose that whereby a thing is this thing , before the action whereby it makes its own likeness .
A non-dependant is an adult son , daughter , friend or relative living with a claimant for housing benefit .
It looks like a good bet for a start is the area around the University or south of London road .
A refugee is a person whose claim for asylum has been successful and s / he is considered by the Home Office to come within the definition of refugee as described in Article 1 of the 1951 Geneva Convention .
Causing or allowing the death of a child is a relatively new offence in Britain , introduced to prevent child murderers simply avoiding responsibility for their crimes by blaming each other for laying the final blow .
* A griot is a West African performer who perpetuates the oral traditions of a family , village , or leader by singing histories and tales .
Let 's not forget that a nightmare is a dream , too .
In either case , failure to comply with a Notice is a prosecutable offence .
I do admit i have in the past been a heavy user of P 2 P some legal some not .. you honestly think £ 20 for a dvd is a fair price ?
> > " I do admit i have in the past been a heavy user of P 2 P some legal some not .. you honestly think £ 20 for a dvd is a fair price ?
What you want for a striker is a combination of Goals AND Assists .
First time buyers often say that raising a deposit is the biggest challenge they face when looking to take their first steps onto the property ladder .
Sure , there are alternatives , but selling stuff for a profit is the basis of nearly every viable business model , it 's not outdated , it 's the central paradigm of capitalism .
On the other hand , should a judge be an Atheist to be as neutral as possible ?
Franchising as a business is a different kind of business opportunity .
His first ship as a midshipman was the new cruiser Belfast , but after her back was broken by a magnetic mine in the Firth of Forth in November 1939 he joined the battleship Valiant , serving in the Norwegian campaign in the spring of 1940 , and with Force H at Gibraltar , taking part in the attack on the French ships at Mers el Kebir in July .
UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown said the UK 's promise , at £ 500 m ( $ 800 m ; 553 m euros ) a year was the highest .
Think the only Savas which will offer an advantage are the MC 0 's as they are slick .
Rawlings said : " There were lots of positives , but also areas to work on , but a win is a win , and with the young side we have got , that is what we were looking for - a response to the defeat at Plymouth Albion - and we got one , even though it was not by a load of points .
pan in live-action , a pan is the horizontal swivel of the camera as , for example , when it sits on a static tripod and follows someone walking across a room .
But my view these people are simple accountants and what really is required as a solution is a more complete package when trying to rescue economies of reduction in public expenditure measures on one hand but also incentives for employment and growth in the private sector .
In fact , what we have observed here is that " a circle is the set of all points in a plane whose distances from a fixed point is a constant ( here ' n ' ) " .
In fact , what we have observed here is that ' an ellipse is the set of point in a plane the sum of whose distances from two fixed points F 1 and F 2 is a constant ' .
How should you know if a compilation is an issue ?
Can we all just agree that a thong is a nearly-buttless pair of underpants and that flip flops are what you wear on your feet ?
More seriously , a cantine is a lot like a cafeteria , except that younger students are usually served their food ( the meals are not self-service until they are in high school ) .
The self-made millionaire who started down in the coal mines as a boy is a popular fictional character , and does occur very occassionally in real life , but he is far outweighed by golden spoons , landlords and speculators .
By Karl Fendelander Asking for a raise is the adult equivalent of asking your crush to prom .
According to the DWP , the only definition of whether a room is a bedroom is the one set out by the landlord of the property , and consideration must be given as to whether the room is large enough to contain a single bed .
Why would the reduction of anxiety in a child be a bad thing ?
A mini-opening is a brief statement - usually in the range of 5 -7 minutes - that describes the context of the dispute , provides a quick overview of the key issues in the case , and gives a " 50,000 foot " description of what the jurors will be asked to decide .
This is normal if we think that an hyperbola is the set of all points in a plane the difference of whose distances from two fixed points F 1 and F 2 ( the foci ) is a constant .
( You could say the same about Jeff Goldblum in just about every movie . ) A villain is another classic choice : since he knows what he 's trying to do , he 'll likely have a concise way of explaining it .
If getting an answer is an explicit goal for your hero , we at least have a sense of forward progress .
In the real world bonuses tend to be in the order of 2 to 5 % of salary and a bonus is a bonus not a right .
The best bonus I ever got as a percentage was a little under 30 % .
And finally I 've yet to see anyone commenting that recruitment to a bank is an open process .
If you think the best place for a supercar is a traffic jam and you like the challenge of squeezing it into an underground parking space that would be tight for a Vespa and has cost you € 200,000 .
Myth " A myth is a way of making sense in a senseless world .
In relation to mobility , transferring a person with dementia using a hoist is a more complex and difficult operation than transferring a frail older person who understands what is happening to them .
The fourteen butterfly species recorded in an hour and a half was the most in a single day this year .
These days , the mark of not successfully lying your way out of a problem is this : Jon Stewart does a segment on you on The Daily Show .
A competency is an ability or skill .
One of the factors that might have caused such a situation is a poor organisational culture in the second organisation .
An example is the notion of managing change , which is ironically now regarded by many people as passe .
The ten en-suite rooms are designed with care - and the wee dram left as a welcome is a nice touch .
AIM Rent a Car is an established force within the rental market , currently based in Chiswick , West London servicing Central London , Heathrow and Gatwick Airports .
A tax is an exaction to raise revenue .
The flame of a fire is a complex , highly organized , recognizable entity .
Client : a client is any form of terminal equipment that , when connected to the external network , provides a user interface for interacting with a service application on an e-box .
A larger theme in Summers ' essay may be that being an adjunct is an incredible job in terms of responsibility , yet often not very financially rewarding or particularly secure .
As with a car brand , the image of a nation is a precious asset .
In the hottest climates , keeping physical work to a minimum was the enforced way of life .
Having taken the plunge I now feel that a dehumidifier is an essential , only wish that I had got one earlier .
A pro 's a pro , there 's nothing like it .
Away from its home country , a mélodie is a potent distillation of the Parisian spirit , a type of exportable musical stock-cube which dissolves in the heat of performance and releases the quintessential flavours of salon and boulevard .
My view is that building a site is a marathon not a sprint .
Of course , if a magistrate takes longer to resolve a dispute than the saving made through its resolution , the use of a magistrate is a net loss to society .
The appearance of a particular token at a certain point in a text is an event with a probability 0 < p(tok) < 1 .
For you and me to drive down the road on a rainy afternoon with the radio on while carrying a conversation with a passenger is no big deal .
When I am not sure if a problem is a cataract or nuclear sclerosis I send the patient to an ophthalmologist but this does n't happen very often .
Corneal scrapings submitted for cytologic exam by a pathologist is a good way to distinguish between eosinophilic keratitis and ulcers from herpes , if there is any question of this .
Allergies can occur in cats and it is possible that an allergy is the problem .
Please indicate when an image is a detail .
We understand that hiring an attorney is an important decision , and can have a significant effect on both your recovery and chances of success .
An injury is a life changing event .
Buying a house is a big deal .
A preapproval is the only way to seriously find out exactly what the bank is willing to lend you .
Similarly whether a judge is a Pentecostal Christian , an atheist , a cultural Anglican , a Rastafarian , an agnostic , a devout member of the Dutch Reformed Church or a member of the File Sharing Religion may well have some influence on the way in which that judge sees the world and how he or she will resolve the legal problems he or she is called upon to adjudicate on .
Complaining about our government at dinner parties and shisa nyama 's while not bothering to do anything about it as a citizen is a rather useless and narcissistic exercise .
A stroke is a medical emergency .
A scar is a mark left on the skin 's surface after a wound is completely healed .
Acting and speaking the same to your children whether you are alone with them or with your friends on a playdate is a sign of wisdom I know I do n't always have .
In Gerhard 's system a sequent is a pair composed of two lists of logical formulae called the antecedent and the succeedent respectively .
Such a thing is a great riot if really generated .
Smooth an shinny is the objective .
As to whether peeing in a cup is an excessive invasion of privacy , I believe that the determination can often be found in the level of expectation .
" It is not an uncommon feeling that educating a girl was a waste of money .
Another reason why it was thought that the education of a girl was a waste is that it was felt that her education would end up in the kitchen .
For example , let 's say a character is the child of Fluttershy from My Little Pony .
Getting > the bounding box of an HTMLElement is no problem either in JavaScript .
Maybe not by all definitions , though Michiel believe every developer or designer involved in a project is a Product Owner .
Daniels to alienate the ladies once again - a woman is the odds-on favorite to become the next justice of the Indiana Supreme Court , with Moberly being the most likely belle of that ball .
Trying for another pregnancy after a loss is a difficult decision .
Given my interest in new technology and photography , buying a drone was the realization of a pressing dream .
What many of them fail to see is that such a compromise is a poison-pill for authentic Christian faith .
A tractor is a small motor that vibrates which is secured against the user 's skin .
An exception is the period of the " black death " in Europe , which produced a noticeable but small downward spike in the curve .
That 's like a man being a woman or a tree being an ocean .
A tracheotomy is an opening in the neck that allows breathing without using the nose or mouth .
A bunion is a foot condition that most people may not be familiar with , unless they happen to suffer from one .
A bunion is a bump that forms on the toe joint -- usually the big toe joint , which is technically known as the first metatarsophalangeal joint .
The gradual separation between the metatarsal bones that leads to a bunion is an example of this .
The breakdown voltage , or dielectric strength , rating of an insulator is the maximum amount of applied voltage it may withstand per unit thickness without conducting appreciable current .
A fiasco is a finished , failed project .
A stronghold is a base where you can put all your items , and has people to train you living there in separate houses .
The true field of a telescope is the amount of actual sky we see in the eyepiece .
Its 72.9 points a game is a hair ahead of Harvard for the best in the league .
His 4.3 assists a night is the second-best clip in the Ivy , his 11.0 points a night make him the Crimson 's second-leading scorer and his all-around skills as Harvard 's floor general have helped push the Crimson to a 20 -4 start .
Chrome OS or its progeny may indeed take over mobile computing in the future , but such an eventuality is both far away and far from certain .
And truly , if wisdom only embraces the knowledge and ability to get wealth , as our Western civilization has defined it , such a man is a fool .
And if a person is the sum of his experience , and I had thirty-five galactic standard years of being Butterflies-are-Free Peace Sincere , Luddite Saint from Granola and darktrader , and fifty times that of being two other guys that happened to be Old Federation Libraries , which was going to win out ?
The presence of intrinsic nature indicates that a dharma is a primary existent , irrespective of its temporal status , namely , whether it is a past , present or future dharma , and hence the Sarvāstivāda declaration that " all things exist .
A seizure is any sudden and uncontrolled movement of the animal 's body caused by abnormal brain activity .
Only in Odessa --- I guess the rednecks thought a stereo was a radio with a cupholder to hold a beer can !
To be able to claim such a birth was a matter of prestige .
" Congress empowered the Board to determine whether a document was an assassination record and to cast a broad net for such records .
A power is an ability just in case it relates an agent to an action .
A more delicate question is whether actually performing an action is a sufficient condition for having the ability to perform that action .
The closeness of a possibility as it figures in ( ii ) is to be understood , at first pass , in terms of what we can reasonably rely on : a possibility is a distant one just in case we can reasonably rely on it not obtaining ; otherwise it is a close one ( Peacocke 1999 , 310 ) .
For a mother is a venerable treasure , a mother is a goodly treasure , the mother of saints and bishops and righteous men , an increase in the Kingdom of Heaven , a propagation on earth .
OCR for page 81 The Aging Mind : Opportunities in Cognitive Research survive , differentiate , and presumably function in a different organ ; an example is the conversion of neural stem cells into a variety of blood cells that circulate and reside in the bone marrow ( Bjornson et al. , 1999 ; Scheffler et al. , 1999 ) .
[ [ p 389 ] ] It is estimated that two pounds of bread a day is a full average for the consumption per head , even if no other food is available .
( 1 ) An administrative law judge may suspend or cancel a hearing at any time if the administrative law judge finds that the nature or complexity of the issues is such that a court is a more appropriate forum for adjudication .
If the developer is n't prepared to offer the bandwidth needed for people to download several hundred megabytes , a CD is the way to go .
If this has already happened to your child and they fear it is going to happen again , then I would say taking along an insert is a must .
Choosing a keyboard is a personal matter , but most people who think about such things favor keys that are " clicky .
Also , in Kansas a basement is a good storm / tornado shelter and in fact years ago I recall my parents driving me past a house that was basically a roof on the ground .
It 's just that I have read enough of your crap to realize that your another one of the millions of blowhards that thinks an education is the same thing as inteligence .
A shrub is a fruit and vinegar syrup that was originally made as a way to preserve fruit for the winter .
A skinchanger is a person with the ability to enter the mind of an animal and control its actions .
The humiliation of a nation is a terrible thing .
" A framework is a collection of abstract and concrete classes and the interface between them , and is the design for a subsystem " ( Wirfs-Brock and Johnson , 1990 ) .
A concern is a goal , concept , or area of interest ( Laddad ) .
One of the delights and privileges of working in a school is the being able to present a good many people with the opportunity of hearing such major works for the first time and of enjoying them ourselves as familiar friends .
) Being thrown from a horse is an inherent risk of riding , even on a supervised afternoon trail ride .
A subarray is a reduced region of the CCDs ( all of the CCDs that are turned on ) that will be read .
( An example of an Attribute is the attribute that prefixes methods of a Web service ...
When a moving situation becomes stabilized , a hastily occupied defensive position may have to be developed into a more strongly fortified position ; the classic example of such a development is the stabilization of the western front in Europe during World War I , when trenches and other temporary defense works became permanent fortifications .
NEWS : Linn 's first new cartridge in a while is a stripped-down affair physically , but packing enough performance weaponry to propel its charge to the top of the analogue hill ...
Edinburgh Fringe 2010 Shakespeare for Breakfast , C theatre , August 2010 Milling around the invigorating C venue with a strong coffee and the promise of a croissant is a great way to start the day , especially when ...
Dear Friends , I have heard it said that matching a priest to a parish is a bit like computer dating .
A lead is a crack in the sea ice that has opened and frozen shut , leaving an area where the ice is much thinner - thin enough that we can break through a hole to enter the water .
If a bather becomes trapped often the only way to free them is to cut the hair - interesting to note is that scissors co not work efficiently underwater and often a knife is the only implement that will suffice !
Such a manoeuvre is an open flaunting of a postmodern aesthetic , which Wilson is keen to profess is a key aspect of his personality .
Green campaigners , including New Forest Friends of the Earth and the New Forest Association , have long opposed the bypass plans but frequent traffic jams have left many thinking a bypass is the only solution .
An example is the virtual store that Starfruit created for international online florist Fleurop-Interflora in Second Life .
The more economical a car is the longer it takes for lpg conversion payback .
In a study is the pump you get healthy habits such as vardenafil ( Levitra ) or points taken over greater reduction in viagra alternative new stenoses other nitrates for allele .
A few thoughts , though , before you go : - Finding a " Father " as your primary reason for a relationship is a BAD idea .
We are more concerned with what 's best for societal stability as a whole and believe that frankly , the idea that everything that makes people feel good or makes life easier is a right is a distasteful notion .
I did n't think of it as a career-it 's a calling [ laughing ] .
Unless you 're talking a piece of fresh fruit-arguably the best way on earth to finish a meal-dessert is a land mine .
A salad is the perfect way to use up those ham slices , especially in a cobb salad lined up with hard boiled eggs , cherry tomatoes , avocado and creamy goat cheese .
Also a dancer , Olga Dvorovenko taught Irina that a ballerina is an ambassador of fantasy , and as such must carry herself like royalty , with stomach pulled in and back held straight .
I 'm really not that big on adults buying each other junk for the sake of it either - some nice cheese or a book is the best route I think , so long as the book is n't Eat Pray Love or The Power of Now .
Offering to drive and / or go with her to an appointment is a great way to show solidarity and commitment to the relationship as well as helping to make sure that these methods are being utilized for maximum efficacy .
I believe that a SE is a business in nature , and it needs to face competition in the market .
" Yet this is a national health problem that affects nearly every family in the U.S. " Until people recognize that a stroke is a life-threatening emergency , they wo n't feel compelled to learn the warning signs ( see " Signs of a Stroke " ) .
A face is a collection of eyes , ears , nose , mouth , etc. You can recognize a familiar face even if part of it hidden ( with a hat or sunglasses for instance ) .
" A chapbook is a small book of poems and ballads .
An example is the twins paradox - is there a formula where I could calculate how much time has passed on the Earth while the traveler is flying in space ?
An example is the capitalization of the word " Tub " which he substituted for " Atlantic " , but DID capitalize .
A breech is a situation that causes a schism in society .
A foreword is an introduction : a " word " that goes at the fore of the book .
[ A cave is an archetype for the mind - sleep - returning / flying / spiraling to higher consciousness .
In astronomy , an asterism is a recognized pattern of stars seen in Earth 's sky which is neither an official constellation nor a true star cluster .
For more efficacious than a man was the power of God overshadowing the virgin , together with the Holy Ghost also who came upon her .
" A gletz is a tiny flaw in a diamond and its presence and the location of the gletz have a great deal to do with the value of the diamond .
By definition , a clone is a set of multi-variable functions on a fixed set which contains all projections and is closed with respect to ( functional ) composition .
But according to the Constitution , a law is a law .
Metaphorically seeking ... a cave is the mind , especially as reality is a consciousness program buried deeply within , to awaken at this time .
It follows from the foregoing that : For the question of whether an individual is a Uranian , it is immaterial whether he takes pleasure in a Uranian or non-Uranian manner .
An allergy is the immune system 's response to a foreign substance ( allergen ) that is not typically harmful to a person 's body .
Being the offspring of a suicide is a known predictor of suicide .
What was more of a surprise was the critics ' negativity about Plath .
That both the story and a poem propel a narrative is a similarity , a parallel .
Can an anecdote be a poem ?
In each case , the main_id identifier for the first DATA_BUFF item to sql_bind_column is generated automatically ; if the col_spec that selected a column is a vector , the remaining one or two elements of col_spec are passed as additional arguments to the sql_bind_column call for that column .
A file is an area of storage to which you assign a name .
For example , the output of a compiler is a binary executable file .
A group is a set of users .
The other way to get more than one thing happening at a time is the ^Z command .
An editor is a program that reads in a file , lets you modify it , and then writes out an updated copy of it .
type-intrange [ exception class ] An argument was an integer , but out-of-range .
So completely senseless and empty a pretence was this whole matter of the naming of the gods , in his estimation .
In mathematics and computer science , an algorithm is a step-by-step procedure for calculations .
[ Points at the Old Man ] What sort of a man is this ?
An activist is a person who 's passionate about a cause and will stop at nothing until that cause is addressed .
Note 1 : A satrap was a governor of a Persian province .
Why could n't a woman be the intrepid journalist ?
A ghost is the only thing in the world that leaves no reflection in a mirror , and in the same family of words as " ghost " you will find aghast , the other side of gay , and Geist or spirit .
" That 's beside the point of the article , but good fact checking is an attribute is the hallmark of publications that mean to be taken seriously .
A person who was present at this desecration of the sanctuary , remarked that such a profanation was an ominous presage , and in support of his view of the matter , quoted the two following iambics of an ancient poet : -- " For such prognostics happen at a time When temples are defiled by impious crime .
Some sports , like cycling , have much engineering at their heart but I suspect most assume a bike is a bike and ( rightly ) look more at the rider .
( 2 ) For the purposes of these Regulations , an employer is a person within the meaning of section 88 ( 7 ) of the Act who -
Forklift engineering apprentices ... a flexible new approach --- For the employer , recruiting an apprentice is a surprisingly straightforward and inexpensive way to benefit from loyal and highly skilled service engineers .
Thornycroft J Taken from the design of the radiator side panels , the two vents in the alloy one on the side panel , the other identation on the top tank , then beside the rim of the mans hat can just be made out a T being the end letter on the casting name on the radiator .
With plenty of safe cycling lanes , touring Davis on a bike is the best way to enjoy the charm and energy that brings countless visitors here each year .
any chance of getting more info for us im sure im not the only one who has a interest is these old cars I posted those photos and details up on another thread about 3 weeks ago .
Multiple nucs sharing a box are a great idea in theory .
Problem there being , if a train is a couple of minutes late into Piccadilly , the driver is full of apologies .
And second of all , a goth is a life enjouyer to a certain point , a philosopher .
Not to be too downbeat about the whole thing but surely in a world populated by over 6 billion people , being an individual is an unrealistic goal .
Being a Goth is no excuse to stink .
Whether or not to have a baby is a major decision , even more so if you have arthritis .
A bezoar is a tightly packed collection of partially digested or undigested material .
Giving headliners The Feeling a miss was a conscious decision based on a thought that hidden musical gems may suddenly reveal themselves in a West Coast pub .
Choosing a prefix is no easy task .
Only time will tell if Blanks ' work will get completely lost in the straight-to-DVD wilderness , or be rediscovered and recognised , like the original , as an Australian classic - but it remains without question an eerie and ambiguous piece , where an arrow inscribed in the bark of a tree is a cryptic sign of the horror to come , and where savage beasts without mirror harsh nature within .
A risk is the potential of suffering some form of harm or loss .
The counterweight to a risk is a benefit .
The plot is always basically the same : a girl dressed as a boy is the son of a man dressed as a woman who wins the hand of a pretty girl dressed as a girl with the assistance of various clowns and at least one person dressed as an animal .
Surely such a crime is every bit as bad as supplying drugs , if not worse .
It 's called squaring because the area of a square is the square of one of its sides .
A language is a living thing and changes with time .
Somewhere in the vicinity of Hall House in a field are the remains of the foundation of The Hall built by Wigleys who married into Gells and then lived at Wigwell Grange I believe ..
4.25 p.m. Open Maiden 5 yo + - 23 entries Only a small entry of 23 compared to recent Maiden races in the area , but still with a safety factor of 15 a division is an outside possibility .
The Government needs to recognise that if the local Post Office closes , often the last shop in the village closes as well , and a Post Office van for a couple of hours a week is no replacement for a Post Office open full time .
A solicitor is a lawyer that deals with the legal side of acquiring the property , such as the drafting of necessary documents e.g. leases ) and forms for registration .
Rulers are great for ruler line badminton , but would a ruler be a good choice to Printable the length .
Twitter is the same way and with there character limit and no images a link is a must anyways .
Can a planet be a COL if the aspects with the significators will not be pefect before they leave the signs or not ?
At first sight , an upheaval of thought is no more a thought than the upset of an apple-cart is an apple-cart .
But where in such a description are the high feelings , the red faces and clenched fists , the raised voices and pounding pulses , that derailed the discussion ?
A fingerprint is the pattern that is transferred from the tip of the finger .
The old saying I apply to a driver is this .
20.01.2006 : WEB-EXCLUSIVE COMMENTARY By Christopher Dickey Newsweek Updated : 10:21 10:21 am ET Jan 19 , 2006 Jan 18 , 2006 - Murdering someone with a missile or a bomb is a ...
There is plenty to see and do in Lausanne and one particular place which is definitely worth a visit is the Olympic Museum ( Lausanne is home to the Olympic committee ) .
Another museum well worth a visit is the Collection de l ' Art Brut , which houses art produced by mentally handicapped men and women .
(a)a decision in proceedings on a claim mentioned in section 115 ( 1 ) that an act is a contravention of Part 3 is binding ;
( 3 ) A reference to a worker is a reference to the person to the terms of whose work the proceedings in question relate ; and , for the purposes of proceedings relating to an equality rule or a non-discrimination rule , a reference to a worker includes a reference to a member of the occupational pension scheme in question .
" A theory is a theory , " O ' Sullivan tells me , " to me , it 's common sense .
An athlete is no longer bet on as if he were a pedigreed rooster , a horse , or a dog .
A symbol is a word , term , sign , shape .
That is , a problem is a field of differential relations and their accompanying singularities or potentialities .
One of the things that we work on a lot is the Zapatista struggle , The Zapatistas teach autonomy , self-sufficiency , self-sustainability .
" What defines a revolution is the support of the better sectors of a country and the hatred of the vilest and most corrupt sectors .
A tantra is a manual of practices .
As to the idea that an army is an object , I would also agree .
A myrmillo and a thraex was a common pairing and one of the most popular in the Imperial period .
A characteristic feature of a retiarius was a galerus , a metal shoulder-guard fastened to the manica .
The only type that can be confused with a retiarius is a laquerarius , of which very little is known except for the fact that he was equipped like a retiarius but was probably armed with a lasso and a spear .
A laugh is a laugh , and to laugh at ( not with ) " Mamma Mia " is irresistible .
The main criteria he used for judging the stage of a culture were the sophistication of industrial arts ( including manufacturing techniques for metal tools , agricultural practices ) and " the extent of scientific knowledge , the definitions of moral principles , the conditions of religious belief and ceremony , the degree of social and political organization , and so forth .
This would only be so if giving a license is the same thing as putting a person in a " position of public trust .
For one frightening moment , I thought the smore on a stick was a corn dog that Teen 2 had topped off with chocolate ...
Critics of Gertz argue that these two categories make little sense and are of no help to a court in determining whether a person is a public figure .
Part of the indoctrination we received was that shorts were evil on either sex and pants on a woman was the greatest abomination you could imagine .
Often , this process begins , she said , only after some kind of triggering event - an arrest is an extreme example - that exposes an immigrant 's illegal status .
The only ones who have a foothold are those whom the system is built around : the computer-controlled billionaires .
" ( 4 A ) For the purposes of the relevant provisions a trust is a discretionary or accumulation trust if it is such that some or all of any income arising to the trustees would fall ( unless treated as income of the settlor or applied in defraying expenses of the trustees ) to be comprised for the year of assessment in which it arises in income to which section 686 applies .
( 8 E ) For the purposes of subsections ( 8 C ) and ( 8 D ) above section 170 ( 7 ) of the 1992 Act shall apply for determining whether a company is an effective 51 per cent .
( 1 ) A debt is a qualifying debt for the purposes of sections 63 to 66 of the M 2 Finance Act 1993 ( deemed periodic disposal of certain debts ) at any time if , at that time , the person entitled to the debt is a company which -
( 2 ) A debt is an exempted debt for those purposes at any time if at that time it is held by the company entitled to it for the purposes of long term insurance business .
( 3 ) A debt is an exempted debt for those purposes at any time if each of the first , second and third conditions mentioned below -
A university is an institution of higher education and research which grants academic degrees in a variety of subjects and provides both undergraduate education and postgraduate ...
17.08.2011 Sven Goran Eriksson 's Leicester City have without a doubt been the biggest spending team in the Championship this season signing no fewer than ten new players .
" ( 2 A ) In deciding for the purposes of subsection ( 2 ) ( b ) above whether a company is a qualifying company at a time falling on or after 29th November 1994 section 164 H shall be ignored .
Recognising that you have a problem is the first stage in dealing with it .
He added : " There was a lot of ill feeling because a school is the heart of a community and it was the only council facility in the village .
An image was a completely new situation for us .
" To intelligence professionals , an agent is the foreign national , the informant , that is committing treason and ' spying ' on his or her own country .
] Understanding every experience as a living being that dialogues with others , in the present tense or looking towards the past and the future .
The advocates ' argument that the exact method of producing the shroud image must be known before it can be proven to be a fraud is a standard example of paranormal illogic in which modest difficulties with the conventional explanation causes the gullible to conclude that the extraordinary explanation is superior .
An applet is a small program which can be incorporated into a Web page .
Usually , a lack of proper spiritual education and moral guidance in a society is a powerful factor that allows the dark shadows easy entrance into clouded human hearts .
An action is the perfection and publication of thought .
' A man is a god in ruins .
Rather than a password , a passphrase is a longer combination of words that form a phrase .
A thought is an ephemeral yet tangible impulse in your mind .
I know a race is a race and a website wo n't save an event but surely if you want to promote an international sports competition then you should have one ?
" At both ends of our lifespans , a marriage is a marriage .
A family is a family , " said the couples ' lawyer , Cincinnati civil rights attorney Al Gerhardstein .
" A family is a loving , nurturing group of people and the identification document when the children come along is the birth certificate , and it ought to be right .
In Himachal Pradesh the PM candidate of a party is the most important consideration for voting with 33 per cent respondents voting for it .
What may be more of a revelation is the extent to which issues of capacity limit the evolution of the donor grantee relationship , new sources of funding , sustainability and most importantly , effective service delivery to the end user community in need of that support .
Some hoarders may present very reasonable and convincing arguments to explain their situation ( Patronek and others 2006 ) and this denial is so pervasive that it appears to be delusional ( a delusion being a strong , falsely held belief that is not in keeping with the culture and that will not change through challenging by others [ Omyebode 2008 ] ) .
( An example is the deletedNotes table , which is just a single-column table of uniqueIDs that is n't backed by a model object .
An apology was the least thing that should have been offered .
The white or the black in a pimple is the bacteria .
Instead , Moreland requires that a person be an " ultimate " originating source , not just the source .
We say the source of an earthquake is a particular rock fracture at a particular location which slipped at a particular time .
But since a belief-desire state is an intention , and an intention is a final cause , it follows that final causes can exist under compatibilism .
To me , a framework is a standard that folks from all over the world agree on and utilize , like Rails or Django or jquery .
An original pencil portrait drawn off a photo is an excellent and special present for Mothers Day , Fathers Day , Graduation , Weddings , Birthdays , Christmas or just because !
A height is a kind of value 5 foot 11 specifies a height .
A community is a web , it 's lots of people talking to lots of people .
Great question , but first a quick clarification of terms - a community is a web of people , a network is a hub-and-spoke .
A battery is an example of a direct current .
A battery is an example of direct current .
An algorithm is a sequence of instructions which , if followed , is guaranteed to result in some desired state of affairs .
Another example of an algorithm is a cooking recipe .
So , given some Cartesian product P , a computation is an algorithm for selecting from P the tuples that constitute some desired function .
V.O : An anniversary is a time to reflect - on all the things you have made possible .
From the charity 's point of view , a solicitor is the wiser , because safer , option .
When someone responds to institutional tweets who replies ... we have a team is a big group but a substantial chunk where it is down to one person .
SEAHORSE as a houseboat was a prominent feature of Coast Road in Mersea for many years .
The sounds of a language are organized into words , and the morphology of a language is the system by which this is accomplished .
A protein snack such as peanut butter or meat sandwich , yogurt , cheese , nuts , milk and cereal or a milkshake are some good choices .
The first is that of ' substantial forms ' , which was a technical term in scholastic philosophy for the essence or form by virtue of which a thing is the kind of thing it is ( in fact , the addition of the word ' substantial ' does n't really affect the meaning ) .
A file is any named collection of information .
Zen - maintaining the " Zen " has for a while been an important element of the guild , and to that effect , there are rules regarding disputes and arguements , be they on Teamspeak or in Guild Chat .
A relapse is the appearance of a new symptom or the reappearance of old symptoms that lasts more than 24 hours .
A kiln is a fairly simple piece of equipment .
A multimeter is a useful tool .
So , a 230 V 13 A plug can deliver 230 x 13 watts , nearly 3000 W. 3000 W is usually written as 3.0 kW , where a kilowatt is a thousand watts .
But a body is that substance which has determinate magnitude , and consequently is understood as being something complete or whole .
Life as a solicitor is a real challenge , you will need to continually keep abreast of changes happening in the law and each new case you work on will be a real test of your skills .
An automaton is a machine .
An automaton is a function that can define a language as an acceptor .
A desire is the beginning of motion .
I was looking for three points before the game but the way the game worked out , probably a point was a good one in the end .
This year 's Awards are presented by the former Transport Minister Steven Norris MP , who before becoming a minister was a co-chairman of the Campaign .
Just @ sk ... 4 a Txt is a free text alert service for young people ...
Using children 's books with bullying as a theme is a ' safe ' and distanced way of approaching the issue of bullying and some schools have begun using books as part of their anti-bullying strategy .
A cohort is a group of students who move through an educational program together .
But even though Santorum would n't get any delegates out of Tuesday 's primary , he would say a win is a win , and would be glad to get it .
There is , however , one central idea that every knight is a servant ; a knight is the one who does only good in the name of love and never brings dishonor to anyone .
An example of such a relationship is a goal of making teachers effective users of technology .
They would no longer take for granted that just because a person is an elected official that they would n't commit a crime .
A religion is a personal belief system and if you are referring to Christianity as the " infallible word of God " , that is a specific personal belief system .
Moreover , an angel is the Western equivalent of a dakini .
Studies have shown that consuming 2 -3 capsules , 3 times a day is the most effective way of taking Curcovia .
A theme is a file or collection of files ( PHP , INFO , CSS , JPG , GIF , PNG ) , which together determine the look and feel of a site .
A desert is a landscape or region that receives very little precipitation .
A desert is a hostile , potentially deadly environment for unprepared humans .
An algorithm is a procedure for solving a computing problem in a finite number of unambiguous steps that frequently involves repetition of an operation , but will eventually accomplish the problem task , produce a result , and halt .
A Program is a set of exact instructions for a computer to carry out .
A Bit is the fundamental information element in a computing system .
A Byte is a contiguous string of eight bits .
A variable is a symbolic name ( or handle ) that represents some data in storage and holds some value .
A bug is a logic error or flaw in the programming that leads to incorrect or unpredictable results .
A trace is the ordered list of instruction locations visited during program execution .
A flowchart is a schematic that depicts the logic flow of an algorithm .
The scope of a variable is the part of the program where the variable can be referenced .
So passing a String as an argument to a method is the same as passing an Array .
In theory , being able to add custom objects to a file is a fine thing .
Hobbes believed that a government headed by a king was the best form that the sovereign could take .
The only way liberals will have an impact is the Clintons and Obamas of this world get punished for NOT saying left wing things .
The default mapping for a collection is the one created automatically by Betwixt .
Underneath , an s-expression is a large recursive datatype that consists of all the base printable values-numbers , strings , symbols , and so on-and printable collections ( lists , vectors , etc. ) of s-expressions .
W h a t is the state of the left in Unite ?
But the serious internal discussions of a withdrawal are the first sign that the administration recognizes just how much support for the war has waned among congressional Republicans and the general public .
The birth of a star is a violent event .
Even if the block were perfectly preserved -- machined of metal perhaps -- putting something on its corner to serve as a target is a physically difficult task that is probably impossible in a theoretical sense .
" But I ca n't stand far enough away from myself to give a really satisfactory answer , for I cannot distinctly remember a time when I did not think that a scientist was the most exciting possible thing to be .
How we make that a reality is the critical question .
A comet is a small body in the solar system that orbits the Sun and ( at least occasionally ) exhibits a coma ( or atmosphere ) and / or a tail - both primarily from the effects of solar radiation upon the comet 's nucleus , which itself is a minor body composed of rock , dust , and ice .
To me , writing a book or short story or making a film is an accomplishment in and of itself .
The law in New York states that walking on the streets is a right , but driving a car is a privilege .
The friend who sticks closer than a brother is the kind of friend to seek and to be .
As to cutting them for the house - I find the only ones that will behave properly in a vase are the white hybrids that are showing up now at outrageous prices in fancy garden centres - I ca n't remember the names , but a friend has a big clump of them and they hold for days in water .
This is quite a point of differentiation , because once you get past the physical aspects , a Chromebook is a Chromebook ; the operating system looks and functions the same regardless of the hardware , and the performance is generally pretty good regardless of the innards .
Fynn stated inter-alia that the job of a Magistrate is a dignified profession that needs both moral and financial encouragement to ensure progress in the judicial system , and avert the cause of putting the condition of the legal profession into disrepute .
Now what sane American would deny that such a policy is a tangible danger for our country 's true national security ?
An array is an arrangement of quantities in rows and columns .
Defination of defibrillator portable AED from the Wikipedia A defibrillator is a medical device used in the defibrillation of the heart .
If you are a woman who does not wear a lot of jewelry , but would like an elegant piece to display your love and commitment , a band is a wonderful alternative .
" In popular music , a fill is a short musical passage , riff , or rhythmic sound which helps to sustain the listener 's attention during a break between the phrases of a melody " Since then I have never heard the song played without that musical fill .
And with week-by-week reading plans , easy-to-use reference material , and stories of encouragement from women like you , A Woman 's Guide to Reading the Bible in a Year is the perfect companion for this life-changing practice .
A Woman 's Guide to Reading the Bible in a Year is a wonderful tool for women wanting to read and understand the Bible .
The first weeks home with a newborn are both delightfully joyous and overwhelming exhausting .
He told me that everything he had accomplished as a writer was the result of the time he spent at the library and that he considered the Chicago Public Library his alma mater .
Yes , an education is an investment , and it 's often well worth it to borrow money to fund your education .
What kind of an alternative is a commune ?
On the other hand , if sensuous qualities surround , and if terrestrial darkness and sensuous passions predominate , if they meet in man only the worldly feel - [ page 13 ] ings , if they find him a captive of evil qualities and fallen into everlasting death , then such a man is the basest and most abject among all creatures .
Maybe the fact that Zodiac does n't have an ending is a blessing for it .
Here a person is a social product and thus for everybody to share .
Sleep during a migraine is a blessed relief .
In fact Arransia 's roads are very well constructed and maintained , certainly far better than is usual in the UK , and to see a pothole is a rarity .
It is worth remembering that this scale is a scientific tool to enable dealers to communicate effectively and that a diamond is a unique piece of nature of which inclusions are a part and may not affect its beauty .
When an alteration is a major ( and a major alteration involves for instance changing the date or venue of your accommodation ) we will advise you as soon as is reasonably possible .
A refuge is a wooden box that is just big enough for one animal to get in , turn around and guard the entrance .
If you supply only one pattern , the result of a search is an N by 2 matrix , where the first column in the position and the second is the length of the match .
The issue of how investigators may take race , ethnicity , or religion into account during an investigation is a difficult question , but it is not a new question .
If crossing a state line to buy a cat is a federal offense , I 'll be able to plead insanity .
The only edible substance in an entire village in the Caucasus where I spent a night was a limi­ted number of evil-tasting cucumbers bottled in vinegar .
Choosing a forex account and a broker is a more time consuming and complex task that it might appear on the face of things , and as a highly competitive market there is legwork to be done to find the best deal .
A diary is a wise investment at this stage , or even an electronic calendar will suffice .
Always happy to get together and have a session is that help .
There are times when an abstention is an honourable third option .
Part of owning a puppy is the fact that you 're going to have to give him an occasional bath .
A keeper is a different beast to other players and confidence is the key , you cannot train confidence only encourage , if that does n't happen then no amount of coaching will help !!!
As you learned in Object-Oriented Programming Concepts : A Primer , an object is a software module that has state and behavior .
The result of a message is a method invocation which performs some action or modifies the state of the receiving object .
An interface is a collection of method definitions ( without implementations ) and constant values .
A briefcase is a slimline leather ( or other more vegetarian-friendly material ) case / bag / folder , which is neat and can hold documents .
The beauty of a briefcase is the fact that it is non-transparent , so the secret confidential paperwork contained therein is kept away from the prying eyes and camera lenses of opportunistic paparazzi .
" " A commodity is an article of wealth produced for the purpose of being exchanged for other articles of wealth .
I think a draw was the least we deserved .
Choosing a solicitor is a critical and difficult decision for anyone in need of legal advice or representation .
A lawyer is an individual licensed by the state to engage in the practice of law and advise clients on legal matters .
Notary , Oath Commissioner : A notary is a legal practitioner of at least ten years experience in the profession .
The two former pipe cots above the main settees have been converted into stowage space , bookshelves etc. Beyond a bulkhead is the head compartment to port with a large hanging locker opposite .
Actually primary insomnia as a diagnosis is a little blurry round the edges - see " Testing the reliability and validity of DSM-IV-TR and ICSD -2 insomnia diagnoses " - but it 's still clear that difficulty sleeping is a major problem for many people .
Another is a further thought on " difficult " sessions and the development of determination , and a third is a metaphor that I think might be useful & fun - mindfulness as a " self-parenting class " .
The prospect of a referendum was a particular incentive so the early work was to promote the case for giving the Scottish public the opportunity to decide their future .
" The prospect of a referendum was a particular incentive so the early work was to promote the case for giving the Scottish public the opportunity to decide their future .
As much as it is a tribute to Francis ' recent writing endeavours , such an award is an acknowledgment of the particular kind of comedy that he was driven towards creating .
A guide is an extremely competent fisherman who will advise , encourage , and fine-tune your efforts to provide you with top class sport and the fishing experience of a lifetime .
All I saw when arriving here as a newcomer was a slow forum , as the saying goes , ' the onlooker sees most of the play .
Printing multiple pics on a page is a doddle with bridge .
A plane that floats down under a chute is a far smaller danger then a plane that drops out of the sky balistic style .
you should be ok on the 3 miler , a pass is a pass , dont know about you but they didnt take my time , so your time could of been the same as the lad that came first for all they know and he said hes * * * to try and book the nearest one but because there all booked it will probly be the end of febuary , but at least it gives me a bit more time to get fitter .
" As man , I think that a man being raped by a woman IS a very different thing to a woman being raped by a man or a man by a man .
Using the correct ( typically the latest ) drivers for a component is another important step to take to ensure that it is operating and performing optimally .
" It must be right that whether non-payment amounts to a breach is a matter of fact to be determined ( not assumed ) .
For example , it could focus on the relationship between judging that an event is the cause of a particular outcome ( a causal judgment ) and judging that the outcome would not have occurred if an event had not happened ( a counterfactual judgment ) .
I never bought a dress on ebay before , it 's always just been tops and other small items of clothing that do n't have to be a perfect fit ( like track pants ! ) , but a dress is a whole other pint of ice cream ( ice cream ?
A draw is the only way to do it , but it should be done by application , not event .
For what it 's worth , I think a ballot was the fairest way to distribute tickets , particularly when demand outstripped supply .
With the number of unemployed at a record high , standing out from the crowd when it comes to applying for a job is a tricky task - particularly if you 're doing so by email .
We want people to be enthused about what they are doing for clients , and having significant moral qualms about a client is a pretty big enthusiasm killer .
A bid is a representation to the auctioneer and to other bidders , and therefore the bid is a fraud under the Act .
" The space gave me lots of inspiration - usually a gallery is a blank canvas but here we 've got something to play with .
With the third and final return of the Andante , Brahms seems reluctant to make the inevitable move from D back to F : indeed , he only clinches it with the final touch of the Vivace , whose return as a coda is a ripe piece of Brahmsian humour .
One of the most valuable assets up for negotiation in a divorce is a spouse 's ( usually the husband 's ) pension .
A tinker is a period artisan , and thus a Tinker 's Guild would be a generic designation ( like a Blacksmith 's Guild ) which could be applied to a badge .
The LoI documented loggerhead : " A loggerhead is an iron tool .
" The permission was not very gracious ; but an irregularity is a serious thing in the British Army .
- A package is a collection of related classes that can be imported into a program .
You have got to admit having the exterior of a house inside a house is a cool idea .
I was a little kid who was blown away by the original show but it 's FORTY years later and I for one am bored shitless by pointy ears and self-congratulatory pseudo-profundities and dilithium ( sp ? ) ethics and an infantile view of a future that will never come A boycott is an organized attempt to encourage others to avoid a product because of some grievance .
A changeset is a set of commit operations ( addition , removal , modification ) which happen along a single invocation of the cvs commit command .
Just because the architectural features in a room are a bit awkward -- sloping ceilings , recessed or protruding walls , unexpected angles -- does n't imply the space is a hopeless design case .
I 'm frustrated by the lack of progress because failure to adopt a budget is a disservice to our constituents .
To advance a claim , of course , is to assert something , and an assertion is an utterance of a sentence .
The end of a marriage is an emotional and trying time for any family , and mine is no exception .
But you need to know that a fiddlehead is a shape , not a species .
Going on a food adventure as a family is a great way to stay connected .
A feature is a way of grouping and describing different functionality that makes up a product .
No doubt that such a picture is in part accurate , because there were many times when a hug was all that was desired , but when hugs came with a price -- a price that did n't seem too steep at the time .
Anything we can do to make it easier for people to get around without a car is a good thing .
A seastar is another term for a starfish .
Such an institution is the Centre for Independent Studies .
The welfare system of a society is an expression of that society 's dominant ethic , but it is a mistake to believe that real relations of domination and exclusion in society can actually be overcome by any amount of allowances , tax-breaks and pensions .
A symbol is a metaphor in which the meaning is given .
A workflow is a sequence of UI actions to complete a specific task .
One of the earliest pictures of me with a car is a diaper change up front in the Škoda .
Before the economic crisis , the mantra was that buying a house was a better financial choice than renting-everyone , it seemed , bought in to that conventional wisdom .
For decades , before the Great Recession , most financial counselors believed that owning a house was the way for average consumers to build wealth .
Although a win is a win .
The first thing to note about the theory , at least as it was first presented , is that a paradigm is an exemplar of scientific achievement , usually a book or a research report , or a family of such exemplars , which appears at a time of crisis in a science .
But in Kuhn 's analysis , a concept is a problem-solution , a practical solution to a problem which arises only within a system of activity defined by the paradigm , itself an exemplar of natural scientific practice .
The uttering of a word is a momentary , transient event , and it is surely only the activity and form of life of which it is a part which confers meaning on words , expressions and gestures ?
The committee 's refusal to allow former general counsel Vicki Divoll to disclose unclassified information to a reporter was the first and only time it has sought to block her from making public comments , based on her experience as one of its most senior aides , since she left Capitol Hill in 2003 .
If a student is a good reader , he or she can pass the reading , social studies and science tests .
Precedent holds that a heart is a shape used for armorial display ( because of the heart-shaped escutcheons found in period ) : " While blazoned on the LoI as ( Fieldless ) On a heart gules , a hare salient contourny argent .
This was in the Dark Ages when such a thing was a novelty .
A perception is a belief about the world that we hold to have extremely high probability .
A bullet is the least of these horses worries really .
Unfortunately some syndicate owners who do n't know the head from the arse of a horse are the ones who will never even consider what is going to happen to the horse if it 's hopeless at racing and it no longer has a career .
Maybe we 'll end up with a rule / definition of a " close call " and then we can shift the controversy to whether an incident was a close call or not !
But perhaps the real test of an exhibit is the amount of audience participation it attracts .
There could also be endless debate ( and is ) as to whether a behaviour is an addiction , a compulsion , an obsession or a full blown Obsessive Compulsive Disorder etc. One way drug and alcohol agencies get round this is by asking " Do alcohol and drugs cost you more than money ?
The only problem facing the police was that a motive was all they had .
In our conceptual framework ( Haxeltine et al. 2008 ) we use a hierarchy of terms to define a transition typology : a mechanism is a societal process integral to transition , triggered by another mechanism , or by an event .
A sceptre is a ceremonial staff held by a king as a symbol of authority .
With , as ever , economy an important factor , these operas rarely have choruses , so to end with a duet was the most logical way to finish with some kind of sonic climax .
An example is the recent US hearing into the EU Data Protection Directive of 8 March 2001 before the House of Representatives , the subcommittee on Commerce , Trade and Consumer Protection , and the committee on Energy and Commerce [ 61 ] .
For information , the hottest part of a chilli is the membrane that attaches seed to the flesh of the plant .
A 911 that does not sit in traffic , howl up motorways , flog round tracks and barrel down B-roads while clocking up 20,000 miles a year is a 911 that is not being used to its full potential .
They went in to the recession with an enormous deficit , with the largest deficit of all the major developed countries and of course since the one thing that they did was a stimulus was the reduction of VAT and that has now been reversed at the beginning of January , they are not really delivering an economic stimulus , they are ...
God has two dimensions , and humanity , too : Master - and servant ; to work the ground , l ' ovdah , based on the root letters Ayin Beit Dalet also means to serve the ground ; elsewhere in the Torah an eved is a servant , or , as the Exodus story relates , a slave .
Getting a pedometer is a great idea ... checking how far you have walked can get quite addictive !
It 's easy enough to set up a website if you have the knowledge , but gaining an audience is a lot harder .
Loops A loop is a small pattern of sound such which may be sampled , synthesized or a mixture of the two and is constructed in such a way that it can be repeated over and over .
" One of the areas that Sir Terry considered would benefit from such an approach is the Edinburgh Waterfront .
But Ball believes the way Fleetwood reshuffled at the back and came back to earn a point is a sign of their strength in depth .
A solenoid is a long coil of wire .
This means that if you find out the quantity of charge ( Q ) that travels past a point in a second ( time - t ) and divide Q by t you get the current - an amp is a coulomb per second .
The resistance of an object is a measure of the how reluctant current is to flow through that object .
An example is a CV designed for a role in IT .
A regular for a restaurant is a customer that comes in once or twice a month , and a regular for a retail store might be someone who visits as few as four times a year .
This idea that a coffeehouse is a ' blank canvas ' in which customers can paint their own experiences , filling in the void of time and life with humanity , companionship , and connection to their community .
what an empire is this !
From an industry perspective , it is clear that higher rates enabling ocean carriers to cover their rising costs and turn a profit is a far healthier position , but there are still a number of factors which threaten this .
In previous years a large part of the autobalance was caused by the inability of the stock inventory system to differentiate whether an item received from a contractor was a new or repaired item .
' salamanders ' : a salamander is a lizard-like amphibian with a smooth skin .
Underlying earnings growth ( excluding bonuses ) has fallen back to within sustainable limits , and weak commodity and import prices also contributed to keeping RPIX inflation below target for most of 2001 - its average of 2.1 per cent for the year as a whole was the same as 2000 , the lowest annual figure since 1963 .
But like a trade-wind is the ancient dame , Mild to your wish and every day the same ; Steady as time , no sudden squalls you fear , But set full sail and with assurance steer ; Till every danger in your way be past , And then she gently , mildly breathes her last ; Rich you arrive , in port awhile remain , And for a second venture sail again .
The process of making a game on a subject is a fantastic way to learn about a topic because the process of designing a game requires one to make complex judgements , think about systems , and every decision represents a value .
Norton Arbelaez , founder of the Medical Marijuana Industry Group , points out that a tax is a good faith promise to the people of Colorado that the industry will operate responsibly and legitimately .
The Splunk SDK for Python API exposes many of these resources as collections of entities , where an entity is a resource that has properties , actions , and descriptive metadata .
The only thing about the item I purchased that was a concern was the top to the swim suit .
The only people who ought to be taking on debt to buy a car is the soon-to-be college graduate , if necessary .
A resume is a poor substitute for a sound argument .
An estimate is the resulting calculation or judgment .
Bridging the gap between a guess and an estimate is an educated guess , a more casual estimate .
A guess is a thought or idea arrived at by one of these methods .
In summary , a guess is a casual , perhaps spontaneous conclusion , whereas an estimate is based on some thought and / or data .
We have no photos of him and my mother and an aunt are the only survivors from his family .
It was n't a statistic-it was a hypothetical .
A meme is an element of a culture or behavior that may be passed from one individual to another by nongenetic means .
A pheochromocytoma is a type of tumor found in the adrenal glands or certain nerve cells .
Megan McArdle : It was n't a statistic-it was a hypothetical .
A virus is an infectious agent that replicates only within the cells of living hosts .
I had a prof be the hardest , nearly meanest , critic of my work , and because I stayed professional and knew he meant well , I became a better writer and he became a great mentor .
A title is a title is a title .
A child is a beautiful gift that develops out of love .
The best site for a castle was a place that could be easily defended -- on a piece of solid rock that stood above the surrounding countryside or on the edge of a cliff above the water .
Question : May a judge be a member of the Association of Trial Lawyers of America or other specialty bar associations ?
A demi-parure is a less elaborate suite of ( usually ) a necklace , earrings and a brooch .
Growing a garden is a lot more rewarding than being nice to a bunch of self-important stuffed shirts at a cocktail party .
The idea that the only possible career choice for a philosopher is a professorship is another example of the distancing of the liberal arts from the real world .
I never got more than most of a high school education so a trade was an option I would naturally look at .
Planning your design prior to stamping onto a surface such as a balsa wood box or wooden beads is important , as a mistake is a little more costly than when you stamp onto plain paper ( although you could , of course , paint over a mistake and make it a design feature ) .
A comic is a story told by a sequential series of images normally with speech bubbles to allow the characters to talk and to further explain the situations depicted .
In our times , in which the citizens concerned about the future , the defense , the depreciation and the sale of the public wealth to rich individuals , such a choice is the only alternative solution for guaranteed protection and efficient economic utilization .
So when certain content is simply not accessible , coding it in a manner so that it works with at least the widely used combinations of browsers / AT for a start is an approach that can hardly be faulted .
Often , they are fixed costs with an example being the rent you pay on your building .
Taken together , this means that 72 % of all Americans ages 16 and older have either used a public library in the past 12 months or live in a household where another family member or a child is an active recent user of the library .
Sod all apple / touchscreen / waste-your-life-on-a-phone , a phone is a phone .
Warn was unlucky to miss the conversion but when all is said and done a draw was a fair reflection of the game as a whole .
The effect was similar as if both parties had ordinary shares but he had waived his right to a dividend and therefore the settlement provisions bit , at least in part , because the right to a dividend is a only right to income and so the spousal exemption for outright gifts does not apply .
Now I sit in a new home shirt with his name emblazoned along the back , a season is a long time for a young footballer and there is nothing stopping Alex from having a similar impact this time around .
Ooh , it is a bit assumptions to assume all FHPs would not meet the entrance requirements for a degree - getting a degree is no big deal - although naturally some people will struggle more than others .
Because a phylactery is an amulet , which usually means a protection from evil , while Tefillin are used for ritual connected with prayer and are not thought of as protective .
The term for a congregation is an ' edah .
At its base , a critique is an examination of a piece of work , be it writing or art or potato chips , and a reasoned response to what is examined .
A motte is a mound made of earth and rubble , on which was built a square timber tower used as a look-out , a place to fire on attacks from , and for storing weapons .
( 3 ) An individual is a qualifying beneficiary if the individual has , under the settlement , an interest in possession ( otherwise than for a fixed term ) in -
(b)where the qualifying business disposal is a disposal of trust business assets in respect of which an individual is the qualifying beneficiary , earlier disposals of trust business assets in respect of which that individual is the qualifying beneficiary and earlier qualifying business disposals made by that individual .
( 8 ) If , on the same day , there is both a disposal of trust business assets in respect of which an individual is the qualifying beneficiary and a qualifying business disposal by the individual , this section applies as if the disposal of trust business assets were later .
( 4 ) For the purposes of this section " the relevant proportion " of an amount is the same proportion of the amount as that which , at the material time -
" Having a baby is a deep burning desire for many women .
;-) I 'd trust Woody Allen 's recommendations over an amateur 's any day .
" Rural Scotland is one of the most beautiful and unspoiled parts of Europe , and staying in a castle is the best way to experience it , " states Andrew Loyd , director of LTR , a Scotland and Cotswolds based agency that scouts out the country 's finest .
A loved one or a Valentine is the name for the person you love , especially on Valentine 's Day .
" An awakening is a going of God among His people , and an awareness of God laying hold of the community .
" An awakening is a community saturated with God .
" A revival is a return to Apostolic Christianity .
A gene is a unit of inheritance , and different organisms therefore have many genes in every cell of their body .
Above on a lozenge are the arms of Monson impaling Poulett .
An objection is a symptom of something else .
Even if a head was an individual , the chapter still refers to the beast as a whole ( with seven heads ) , and not to one head or other .
The murders themselves are no bloodbaths , but they are mostly pretty juicy - the impalement of one character on a spear is a stand out .
I would also like to say well done to all the runners up for making it to the final stages of the Challenge , this year has been very competitive and to be chosen as a finalist is a credit to their business .
\ r \ n What needs doing is a rewrite of the penal laws so that the punishment fits the crime if for example if you kill some one the need to prove intent should not be needed a death is a death and if you are carrying a weapon then that should prove intent to kill and should carry a setence of life which should mean just that .
We shot the exteriors way up in the Valley , and the long shot of Hull House seen from a distance is a painting .
How big a problem is this proving to be ?
And that is why being a Mormon is the only choice .
" It does n't matter if a person is a Calvinist or an Arminian as long as he has the saintly character of someone like David Brainerd or John Fletcher or Robert Murray M ' Cheyne or Dr Sangster .
Title : Re : IPL M 1 TL - Loudspeaker Kit Post by : Hidden on April 28 , 2011 , 08:30:1 8 AM Nice job , it 's great when a job is a bit daunting and when you stick ( iron ) at it you are really chuffed you are tenacious and see it through .
It must be said that the much greater weight of a backpack is a disadvantage , but is insignificant compared to the many gains .
The traverse of Stob Coire an t-Saighdeir was an easier and quicker walk that brought welcome relief and we took the path that bypasses the corrie edge for a more rapid descent to the wide bealach below Devil 's Point .
Every effort will be made to avoid repossessing your home and an eviction is a last resort .
Obviously a suite is the best cabin available , but this is not suitable for everyone 's budget so the best option is to choose a cabin type that fits your budget .
The UKMPA was actively involved as a stakeholder is this process .
One text book definition of a trust is that ' a trust is an equitable obligation binding a person ( who is called a trustee ) to deal with property over which he has control ( which is called the trust property ) for the benefit of persons ( who are called the beneficiaries ) of whom he may himself be one .
The first to be built by a railway were the twin hotels at London Euston , opened in 1839 by the London & Birmingham Railway .
A story is a tangle of themes and each person can unravel it in a different way .
A greenhouse is a wonderful way to get more pleasure from gardening , and create a whole new dimension outdoors .
An example is the explanation of lift generation by a wing in terms of the air above the wing " having further to go .
( 4 ) Get a friend on board : a night out with a mate is the perfect cover story .
An example is the use of Fourier analysis , to examine the frequency spectrum of the object under test .
It does not happen that way because a ship is a floating object that can also bodily drift sideways when submitted to an effective lateral force .
At a given moment , the COLR of a vessel is that point where , if you apply an " effective " lateral force , no rotation ( if the vessel has a steady heading ) will occur .
We might say that a measure is a valid one , or that a valid sample was drawn , or that the design had strong validity .
Using the IC as an oracle is an exercise in seeing .
This modern theory of motivation contained in Festinger 's Cognitive Consistency Theory ( 1957 ) illustrates that commitment to a decision is the beginning , not the end of conflict .
A risk is a risk - by definition , it is not even close to being an inevitability .
To say simply that a risk is a risk is an entirely meaningless statement unless one can quantify the risk .
Johann appears , at least in part , to think that universal registration will serve as a deterrent to potential rapists - and to some small degree it might have just such an effect on some , but that presupposes that uppermost in rapist 's minds at the time the carry out a rape is the fear of being caught and punished for their crime .
A flag is a piece of cloth , they might have died for freedom , which , by the way , is the freedom to ...
A tumour is an abnormal growth .
In a nutshell , a meeting is a gathering of people who suffer from social anxiety , with the purpose of doing something about it .
Everyone who sells a car is a lying toe-rag .
A microgrid is an electric power distribution system containing loads and distributed energy resources ( such as distributed generators , fuel cells , renewables , energy storage devices , and / or controllable loads ) that can be operated in a controlled , coordinated way - either while connected to or disconnected from the main power network .
The utility of an item is the only true measure of the quality of its design .
Building a treehouse is the ultimate active , authentic , interdisciplinary activity .
A mermaid being an 8 creature - one that lives in 2 worlds .
Tail recursion occurs when the last statement in a function is a call to the function itself .
Taking a nap is a little bit different than sleeping at night .
So a teacher is a representative of such a lofty mission , a worker , and an architect of ideas .
A conservative is a man with two perfectly good legs , who has never learned to walk .
We think of freedom as a right , and therefore the opposite of a rule , but a right is a rule .
A lyophilizer is a glorified freeze-dryer ( think backpacking food ) .
However , as stated above , the standard for determining whether an interference with comfort amounts to a nuisance is an objective one and the nature of the locality will be taken into account by the court .
( This definition implies an increase is an appreciation .
A desiccant is a hygroscopic ( attracts and holds water ) substance that induces or sustains such a state in its local vicinity in a moderately sealed container .
A desiccant is a hygroscopic ( attracts and holds water ) substance that induces or ...
An earthquake is a more complicated process than a stone splashing into water , and the seismic waves that are set up during an earthquake are more varied than those on the pond .
A modulus is a measure of how easy or difficulty it is to deforms a material .
In general , earthquakes generate larger shear waves than compressional waves and much of the damage close to an earthquake is the result of strong shaking caused by shear waves .
A tendon is a type of connective tissue , a thick cord , which connects muscle to bone .
Yes , in the second ; but not because being a writer is any more gratifying than being an engineer , but only because I 've grown older and becoming older means becoming more sensible , more heedful of what surrounds us .
A small group or part of a population is a sample .
An event is any collection of outcomes .
The probability of an event is a measure of the likelihood that the event will occur .
If each outcome is equally likely , the theoretical probability of an event is the ratio of the number of outcomes in the event to the total number of possible outcomes .
The experimental probability of an event is the ratio of the number of times the event occurs to the total number of experiments .
A doll is a museum for showing .
Having the ability to provide a location is the second step .
' To be a King and wear a crown is a thing more pleasant to them that see it , than it is pleasant to them that bear it , ' she remarked in her Golden Speech of 1601 .
A hypothesis is a prediction that a scientist makes based on what they already know .
His need for new orthotics once or twice a year is a huge drain on funds .
Einstein 's ( law ) Theory : Energy equals mass multiplied by the speed of light squared which is sometimes stated as the speed of light in a vacuum is the fastest speed possible and equal to approximately 186,000 miles per second .
" An algorithm is a procedure that requires no intelligence -- it 's just a procedure , " Dennett said in an interview with TechTV 's " Big Thinkers " television series .
A name is a label used to identify a particular person , thing , deity , category of things or people , phenomenon , concept , or anything which is a subject of speech , writing , or thought .
I do n't try to determine whether an author is a good person , or whether all of that author 's beliefs are appropriate .
Godin ( 1987 ) found that ' enjoyment ' in an activity is the main attitudinal dimension that is associated with an individual 's intention to participate .
A poet is a person who writes poetry .
' ( 3 ) An aerodrome is an aerodrome as defined in section 105 ( 1 ) of the Civil Aviation Act 1982 ; and a manager of an aerodrome is a person who is in charge of it or holds a licence granted in respect of it by virtue of section 60 of that Act ( Chicago Convention , regulation of air navigation etc ) .
And this is not so surprising when media coverage of ageing invariably focuses on problems of one sort or another : Alzheimer 's , or the economic threat posed by an ageing population , with the clear implication that such a population is no use to anyone .
no regen , when dead go to regen point for part 2 Attackers have 2 minutes to get " technician " into the building ( say a marshall is the technican ) , before the anti-terror squad gets there .
A collection is a category you create on your Kindle Keyboard Home screen .
Removing the wiper arms without a puller was the hardest bit , and that was just a pre-soak in WD 40 and a bit of a wiggle .
An annual inspection ( whether free or say £ 50 if not done during a service is a debateable question ) is fair enough and at least everyone would know where they stand .
1 owner or 10 should n't matter a warranty is a warranty if the terms and conditions are adhered to .
A netbook is a PDA for real people .
Whether a tyre 's any good in snow depends to a great extent on the formulation of its rubber .
I do n't think it 's trying to make them human and I 'm not going to complain about a dog being a bit spoilt when there are so many neglected and abandoned out there .
A cypherpunk is an activist advocating widespread use of strong cryptography as a route to social and political change .
Cult : a cult is any religion different from our own , especially small groups , and especially as that group 's practices and beliefs differ more strongly from our own .
A cryptor is a fancy name for a stub of code which includes encrypted malware .
The third way of introducing a bill as a backbencher is a Ten Minute Rule Bill .
Writing an article is a good option .
Such a view is a challenge to boneheads on both the right and the left .
Taken to a real extreme is the guy of the EU out of Belgium recently saying that a vacation was a " right " !
The idea to make a film was the idea to do it in this way .
It 's not that Obama does n't know how to solve a problem , to him , solving a problem IS the problem .
I mean that a book is a problem in that it is composed out of meaningless scratches on a page that must be translated into ideas that live inside your head , and you use a set of skills ( literacy , critical thinking , etc. ) to make that happen .
( Throughout the novel , she repeatedly defends Monica and seeks to understand her , while the boys just want to put her into the easy category of Enemy . ) Hazel does this quite a bit-she 's a very empathetic person and repeatedly defends and seeks to understand people and be generous to them .
At the moment , a phone is a phone is a phone .
I never watched " Desperate Housewives " but I seem to recall a conceit of the show being a narrator being a murdered housewife ?
Bergman as a demanding countess and McLaine as a floozy are the most memorable and boy were Delon and Sharif easy on the eyes !
Throw away the idea that all biology is the same , and that a cure is a cure is a cure .
The button that looks like a headrest is a dummy : the headrest moves up and down with the front / back position of the seat .
An ante-room is a kind of preface which announces what is to follow , but promises nothing .
Katya : I think a plugger is a no-frills , sentimental , blue color worker in middle america .
A plugger is a person who reads and responds to meaningless blogs .
So I always used to think a sound was a sound and nothing else .
( a ) If a school employee has information that a pupil is a pupil to whom the provisions of this subsection apply , the school employee shall report such information and identify the pupil to the superintendent of schools .
Triple point The triple point of a substance is the temperature and pressure at which three phases ( for example , gas , liquid , and solid ) of that substance coexist For example the temperature and pressure of my arse during a bad fart after a good curry !
Intuition of Reality will not be induced by a logical interpretation ; an interpretation is a succession of ideas closely attached one to another , a vantage point which only allows us a single perspective .
It is not a prayer ; a prayer is a prolonged thing .
( 2 ) For the purposes of paragraph ( 1 ) , the term of an agreement is the term originally provided for , or , in the case where the term was varied before the date on which these Regulations are made , the term provided for on that date .
People die from taking performance enhancing drugs and a ban is the easiest way to operate .
An example is the sequence in Cross of Iron ( West Germany / UK , d Peckinpah , 1977 ) where Sergeant Steiner ( James Coburn ) is caught in an explosion .
You 'd be wise to replenish your energy levels to cope with Jones 's design philosophy , where a par is tough and a bogey is the norm .
( 2 ) For the purposes of these Regulations the representative of a trade union recognised by an employer is an official or other person authorised to carry on collective bargaining with that employer by that trade union .
If 90 % of the silver price volatility leans towards the upside for all the clear and present reasons , and 10 % leans to the downside for their own reasons , then a smackdown is a small gift allowing us to buy into those momentary dips $ 32 -35 a ounce is a good price base and I am buying at that price where I can find supplies .
An example of an institution that portrays religious faith as a virtue is the establishment in England ( for example , in the promotion of schools of a religious nature by successive governments and by the Church of England ) .
It is unfortunate and regrettable that Wagner should have to be reminded that a dedication is a personal choice of the author and is not subject to any form of politically-correct vetting .
The UK 's communications sector as a whole was the second largest in Europe , behind Germany ( £ 41.8 bn ) and ahead of France ( £ 30.2 bn ) .
But a play which has run in London for over a year is no failure .
He says that an insult is a subjective experience , and it is impossible to insult anyone if they do not acknowledge it .
But Spain the country as opposed to Spain the place where you get the sort of holiday diarrhoea that feels like you just released a flock of racing pigeons out of a basket is a very , very different place .
In this context a nominee is a person appointed by the trustees to hold trust property in his or her own name .
Whether or not a person is an associate is determined by the application of section 435 of the Insolvency Act 1986 .
Measure : a measure is a piece of legislation passed by the General Synod of the Church of England to which the Royal Assent has been given .
Nominee : in the context of a nominee for trustees , a nominee is a person nominated to hold trust property in his own name on behalf of the trustees .
Power : in this context , a power is an authority to act in relation to another 's property .
Trust and trustee : a trustee is a person who has property or rights ( trust property or assets ) which he holds or is bound to exercise for or on behalf of another or others , or for the accomplishment of some particular purpose or purposes .
Such a system is a reasonable choice in areas where labor costs are low and material is readily available .
The three main components of a valve are the body , valve seats and the shafts or stems ; these will be considered separately .
A stressor is the stimulus ( or threat ) that causes stress , e.g. exam , divorce , death of loved one , moving house , loss of job .
A nugget is a business idea that can be taken from small beginnings and turned into a pot of gold .
Over-blurring a subject is a common mistake .
So mirroring an image of a house is a lie .
A font is a work of art and represents the individual genius of its creator .
Registering for a patent is an expensive and time-consuming process and is often outside the ability of a small design firm .
There is also a pane which contains a similar set of names used in sfnts ( an sfnt is a font file format which includes truetype , opentype , and a number of more obscure font formats ) .
Further , as the Philosopher [ 7 ] says , the cause of both the safety and the danger of a ship is the same .
Here is a definition I like : " A tree is a woody plant with a single erect perennial trunk at least 3 inches in diameter at breast height ( DBH ) .
In contrast , a shrub is a small , low growing woody plant with multiple stems .
A vine is a woody plant that depends on an erect substrate to grow on .
Just knowing a plant is a tree , as opposed to a vine or a shrub , is the first step toward it 's identification .
For a topic such as this where the technology is subject to change , I am not sure a book is the best delivery method .
" The cost of deploying a service is all infrastructure , " said Hamilton .
As the name suggests , a thermoset is a material ( such as rubber ) that cures or hardens ( sets ) into a given shape , generally through the application of heat ( a thermal increase ) .
A bust is a bust now matter which uniform he is putting on .
An easement is a railroad track laid in a parabolic curve .
A semi-circle is a 180 degree turn that has a constant radius .
For some , a slate is a lighter , slimmed down tablet without a dedicated physical keyboard and other extra components ( as opposed to , say , a convertible tablet which looks very much like a laptop when the folding keyboard is out ) .
It means that , if you sell Gertrude Stein , you put Gertrude Stein at the same level as [ John ] Grisham : it makes no difference , a book is a product .
You need to be sure that a blog is the right tool for the job .
In this scenario with maybe a narrow house majority I find it hard to believe that obstruction a outrance is a viable strategy for the GOP particularly if it 's taking place against a background of a steadily improving economy .
An Element is a simple machine that is comprised of a Form and one or more Behaviors .
Of course , if a smile is all you want , or a recycled press release - fine .
A third is a fisheye (!) .
One of the things I like to photograph when I 'm on an airliner are the " landscapes " you ca n't see from the ground .
Photographing at night from an airplane is an uphill battle .
The LH-RH orientation of a plane is the same as a car 's .
When considering choice on iphone case the right away thing to come to a conclusion is the value of protection requisite .
A bicycle is a marvel of engineering efficiency , one where an investment in 22 pounds of metal and rubber boosts the efficiency of an individual mobility by a factor of three .
I also know how difficult it is to take a photo of the real thing , and personally I place a tremendous amount of value on knowing an image is an attempt at being accurate .
" You and a friend are the top aces of your time - the pride of the British and German air forces .
A loan is a sort of debt that entails the transfer of a fixed amount of money between the lender and the borrower that is obligated to pay an equal amount of money ( usually plus interests ) back to the lender later .
A spell is a recipe that you put together to help yourself visualize your magical goal .
The internal energy of a system is the sum of the potential energy and the kinetic energy .
A tie-line is a horizontal ( i.e. , constant-temperature ) line through the chosen point , which intersects the phase boundary lines on either side .
A lease is a term during which you have the right to occupy a property ( usually a flat ) .
No engineer would question the importance of such skills to professional engineers ; but few would feel that a university was the right environment in which to teach them .
The work that has been done on propaganda policy and output , on techniques and methods , needs to be continued if we are to understand what policy-makers wanted audiences to believe , but what those audiences actually believed as a result is a minefield loved by undergraduates because of its fertility as a field for often counter-factual speculation .
A harbinger was the bursting of the cesspool wall in Um al-Nassar last year , where five people drowned in a river of sewage .
The only remains of a garden was a narrow strip about 6 ft wide between the end of the conservatory and the back door .
Additionally steel as a metal is the most durable product .
As Mark Hall , HMRC IT Director said " Successfully moving huge amounts of data and 17 IT systems with 300 interfaces over a weekend is a fantastic achievement .
A rabbi was the first to tell me afterwards that the Palestinians were victims , that they should be given a real state .
I did n't feel that a telephone was the best means of finding out what might be going on in her mind , so I left it at that .
Well , a rom is a copy of that , in a file format .
A symbol is a concrete representation of an idea , action , or thing-a sign that stands for something , as crossed rifles stand for the Infantry and as wings and propeller represent the Air Forces .
A symbol is a kind of cement that holds together a social group .
A chemical is a reducing agent with respect to a particular metal when the free energy change for its oxidation is more negative than the free energy change of oxidation of the pure metal .
In the preceding pages we have seen that the standard free energy change for a reaction is a very useful quantity to know , in that its value affects the equilibrium constant and gives composition of the system .
A highlight is the Compton Cinema Organ , a rare fully operational cinema organ still in its orginal location .
A rubber is a fully amorphous , lightly cross-linked polymer , above Tg .
In the car we ; ve experimented with various things , and found a calculator is the best distraction .
An area often overlooked on every exterior of a property is the guttering and fascia detailing .
There are different species , and the ones that get talked about a lot are the mosquitoes that bite people and infect them with diseases such as malaria and dengue fever .
The poor victim ( a large inactive lady who wanted to get slim and fit for her wedding day ) looked terrified most of the time , when she was n't showing huge embarrassment - the scene where McKeith tells her that poo should look like a sausage was a classic .
A conspiracy is a conspiracy is a conspiracy is a conspiracy by any other name !
NICE guidance on ezetimibe [ 20 ] states that ezetimibe monotherapy is an option only if statins are contraindicated or not tolerated , and ezetimibe in combination with a statin is an option in some limited circumstances where statins have not appropriately controlled cholesterol levels , despite appropriate dose titration and consideration of switching statins .
See line 42 - a foundry is a factory or workshop for casting metals and , by extension , for performing all forms of metalworking and machining .
Even Silence Has an End is the tale of her jungle ordeal which included beatings by her captors , mutual ...
( A samoosa is an Asian fast food : a small fried pie with a spicy lamb filling ) His innocent question unleashed a tirade of anti-US hate speech and a death threat by Abudul Hoosen , 67 , the knife-wielding Simon 's Town cafe owner .
The current clamp - not necessarily inaccurate , but the measurement resolution will be limited causing errors at low power - but a clamp is a necessity for an easy installation .
A sumac is a shrub or small tree with red cone-shaped fruits used as a spice in cooking .
Smoke from a fire is a flammable gas !
The definition according to the government is , " A property is an HMO if it is let as a main or only home to at least three tenants , who form more than one household and who share a kitchen , bathroom or toi let.A household consists of either a single person or members of the same family who live together " .
A prius is a lot of expensive and toxic chemicals wrapped up in a " green " con-trick .
A musket is a muzzle-loading smooth bore long gun fired from the shoulder .
Haversack : A haversack is a bag with a single strap which is designed to be worn over one shoulder , or crossed across the chest if the haversack is particularly heavy .
It seems that the charge of missing a parade was a relatively minor matter but pressed by people who had cushy jobs and frightened that they might lose them to experienced soldiers like my father .
Chris Howard , headteacher of Lewis secondary school in Caerphilly , said a pension was an " integral part of the pay bargain that every public sector worker makes with the government " .
A popular gambit in cryptozoology is to say that a cryptid is a real animal that was presumed long extinct but has lived on undetected .
It was n't often that a man was this open about his weaknesses to her .
that a single ste , or preferably just a turn was the best distance away ...
An example is the German energy company RWE , one of the biggest German energy companies .
The intrinsic value of a thing is the value it has simply in virtue of what it is , rather than the value it has in virtue of what it leads to , signifies , entails , purchases , and so on .
An order is an order .
If an action is a crime , then encouraging that action can also be a crime ( " incitement " ) .
To be a mother is a joy , but at the same time how many cares there are , often there is no time to pray in peace or to read or to rest from daily labors ; and how often a mother 's heart is grieved by family quarrels and outbursts of dissatisfaction ; and how much do disobedient , careless children weigh upon a mother !
Using a thermometer is the only reliable way to ensure safety and to determine the " doneness " of beef and most other foods .
Notes A Note is a dated , public record of an idea , comment , or document .
A Note is a dated , public record of an idea , comment , or document .
An example is the death of Princess Diana and the Egyptian , Dodi Fayad , as they struck the thirteenth pillar of the Alma tunnel .
Many of the more prominent RMT advocates use a checklist approach to diagnose repressed memories of childhood sexual abuse as the cause of a patient 's problems , despite the fact that " there is no single set of symptoms which automatically indicates that a person was a victim of childhood abuse " ( APA report ) .
How can we be sure that a memory is a symbol of child abuse and not of adult abuse by co-workers , or by other children who tormented the patient years ago , or by the therapist him - or herself ?
A : A stipend is a form of monetary payment or salary , such as for an internship or apprenticeship .
To fail in an attack was a very different matter from being vanquished on the defence .
A cookie is a small text file that a website stores on your computer .
Most U.S. jurisdictions apply the Dominant Factor test to determine if a contest is a game of skill or a game of chance .
Another thing that you might check with a mechanic is the aircon system .
Lowering or eliminating the risk of a fire is an extremely important home security strategy because a fire can cause extreme destruction very quickly .
Sometimes a breakup is a message such as not having enough space , wanting to focus on the career or just wanting to be single again .
So maybe the city is trying to say that a deck is an " addition " to our carts but this is really unclear in what Randy Leonard has been saying .
The artist 's recent rendition of one riding a bike is a pleasing simplistic image .
To Rob in Canada , if you think a billion dollars is " by no means an obscene amount of money , " take into consideration that a billionaire is a millionaire a thousand times over .
In comparison to the mind numbing procedural issues faced on Workplace , database deadlocks and thread safety errors paled as problems ; days spent pouring over pages of logs looking for hints to a problem were a luxury and rewriting large chunks of someone else 's code at the last minute to fix a critical issue was simple child 's play .
A frog is a small , tailless animal with bulging eyes .
Planning a party is a great way to stay involved without having to watch the games .
I do n't think showing this imagery on a website is a bad thing .
Lol my healthy indulgence as a kid was those lick-a-sticks ... a sugary candy stick dipped in none other than packs of more powdered sugar !
Oatmeal with a Fork is a part of the Amazon Affiliate Program , meaning that I receive a small portion of revenue if you purchase certain products through this site .
As you will see shortly , Paul di Filippo 's " A Year in the Linear City " is indeed a story in which a city is a major character .
" If a budget is a reflection of our national priorities and morals , then we cannot ignore the reality of hungry families and high unemployment , " said JCPA Chair Dr .
A blog is an easy way to get your feet wet in launching a website .
Talking about what their email address means to you as a marketer is a fantastic way to bridge that gap , plus you 're taking advantage of a very hot part of online marketing today : VIDEO !
In any case , according to Chomsky and Herman , " The horrendous situation in Phnom Penh ( as elsewhere in Cambodia ) as the war drew to an end was a direct and immediate consequence of the U.S. assault ...
I think turning these questions into an assignment is an excellent idea .
Utilizing assets by renting your spare room or offering a lift to a neighbor for a fee is another good idea to generate extra cash .
' An aide is a nurturing person .
Follow these tips and tricks to cut down on your race related costs : Join a Charity Running for a charity is a win-win situation .
If you are serious about dancing then an X-Pole is the only sensible choice that you could make - you will just need to decide whether to opt for the static ( XS Sport ) of spinning ( XX Xpert ) model .
Although I gave a charitable interpretation , grammatically , ' hiddenness ' is an adjective and to say that an adjective is a place is really nonsensical .
A person 's interest in a benefit is a " property " interest for due process purposes if there are such rules or mutually explicit understandings that support his claim of entitlement to the benefit and that he may invoke at a hearing .
The very last stage of creating a remix is the arrangement , production & mastering of all the tracks .
An application is the object that has final say in what goes on in the universe ( with the universe being the application 's environment ) where the engine should only be enhancing it , rather than changing it drastically .
A concussion is the temporary loss of normal brain function as a result of an injury .
" A vision without a task is but a dream , a task without a vision is drudgery , a vision and a task is the hope of the world .
But close up a world 's all dirt and rocks .
For people with the capacity to save for retirement beyond their qualified plan contributions , an annuity is the next best thing for achieving tax favored growth of earning .
In the totalitarian state a trade-union is an instrument used by the government to enforce duties , not to assert rights .
Further telling the truth about your life as a woman is a radical and feminist act .
First thing : A deletion is a deletion .
Richard Blanco : Entering into writing a poem is an emotional endeavor for me as well as a spiritual and creative one .
A job is a job , Apple will always be there ( at least I hope it will be - I love my Mac ) .
A refinery is a factory .
Not that the idea of a purge is a very abstruse concept , as ubiquitous as these have been in totalitarian regimes .
The dramatic events of the past year and a half are a classic case of the kind of systemic breakdown that he-and relatively few others-envisioned .
That said , by 2005 I think most people understood that-at a minimum-there was a substantial risk that houses had become overvalued .
* Collective Knowledge of a Corporation ( U.S. v. Bank of New England ) o The knowledge of a corporation is the sum of the knowledge of all of its employees ; totality of what all of the employees know within the scope of their employment .
Actually , a nutritionist is a person with a master 's degree in nutrition .
A veteran is a student who participated in active service in the US Army , Navy , Air Force , Marines , or Coast Guard and was released under a condition other than dishonorable .
As Freud had argued , he takes it that what is at stake within a symptom is a repressed desire abhorrent to the consciously accepted self-conception and values of the subject .
Before the work of interpretation , a symptom is a floating signifier , whose meaning is unclear to the analysand , and also to the analyst .
Trouble soon began , when it became apparent that the entertainment of a god was an exceedingly expensive affair ; while the death of one of the immortal crew , and his burial on the island , put a certain strain on even native credulity .
To better appreciate the ambiguities in Latour 's theses , let us reread the Third Rule of Method from his book Science in Action : " Since the settlement of a controversy is the cause of Nature 's representation , not the consequence , we can never use the outcome -- Nature -- to explain how and why a controversy has been settled .
Also having a plain plate for a bridge on a bass is a bad idea .
An example is a browser extension tool that enables users to see whether resources found in other ways are in the NSDL , e.g. , when a page of results is returned from Google the user clicks the tool and each URL on the page that references an NSDL resource has a hyperlinked logo appended to it .
A comp is a free service or product awarded by casinos to players who they consider " good " .
A common alternative to an IPO is a reverse merger , sometimes referred to as a " reverse IPO .
The absolute value of a number is the distance from that number to the origin ( zero ) on the number line .
( er , citation somewhat needed ) Sweden ( from wikipedia ) In Sweden , the contents of a dumpster is the property of the owner of the dumpster so taking items from a dumpster is technically theft .
" The normal way of getting a latte is a cold , economic exchange , " continues Edelman .
You 've basically assumed anyone who touches a game is a shallow idiot .
The importance of knowing a dodo is a bird : Categories and inferences in 2 - year-old children .
The really important part of a rule is the exception to it .
AI simulations of our capacity for classification have arguably fallen within an RE Subset , an example being the non-recurrent artificial neural networks that have been used for classification tasks .
" Just being a finalist is a great validation of how the community has come together in a shared vision and a shared plan , " Brown said .
" A firearm is a tool whose purpose is to place a small amount of metal accurately at a point in space .
Generally an icon is a sign which evokes other signs through a similarity of form .
Just such a boon is the philosophers ' concept of a zombie , a strangely attractive notion that sums up , in one leaden lump , almost everything that I think is wrong with current thinking about consciousness .
Not everyone who keeps a journal is a journalist , he points out , and " you can write on the Web about your work and life without being a journalist .
Yer cousin Elizabeth is gooin ter ave one an all , an er 's an old woman .
One of these is a method and apparatus for producing rays ' and other manifestations of energy ' in free air , eliminating the necessity for a high vacuum ; a second is a method and process for producing ' very great electrical force ' ; the third is a method for amplifying this force and the fourth is a new method for producing ' a tremendous electrical repelling force ' .
( b ) A caterer is a person who prepares , furnishes , or prepares and furnishes food intended for individual portion service at the premises of the consumer , whether such premises are temporary or permanent .
( b ) A commissary is a place where food is stored , processed or packaged and prepared in individual portions for service at a food service establishment .
( a ) Operation of a food service establishment without a permit is a violation of this Subpart .
Also discuss the signs that exist when a friend is a bully .
A disadvantage is an overall slight green color cast , which is corrected by adding one unit of magenta .
So that , to use ordinary language , an avatara is an incarnate god because the noble human so chosen expresses through himself some more or less large part of the Over-illuminator .
An avatara is a partial manifestation of a divinity in a human being , and is not the manifestation of a man 's own inner god ; for when this latter happens , then we have among us a Buddha .
" 4 A strike is an economic boycott ( we will distinguish among types of boycotts below ) , but it often involves pressures that are not exclusively economic , such as the local faculty union 's asking outside speakers not to come to a campus during a strike or the refusal of faculty elsewhere to attend conferences held on a campus where a strike is in process .
Congrats on the new record John , $ 20,000 a month is a very comfortable living even with the currency exchange problems you 've been suffering .
The content of an element is a sequence of elements from any namespace ( otherwise modification of segments would not be possible ) , however , XML Schema 's attribute is set to skip , therefore , it is possible to use the same IDs several times e.g. when modifying a element ) .
understand that a conclusion is the statement in an argument which is supported by the premises .
Anyone who would want to do such a thing is an idiot .
A person is a person because they have a unique set of personality traits , history , way of thinking , and way of perceiving and interacting with the world .
A manufacturer is the company that actually makes and produces a product , and therefore will often require you to purchase in large wholesale quantities .
A meme is a term for just that .
So using him as a reference is another matter and thinking about things on your own another .
That was back in 1992 , when the only proper pairing for a meal was a glass of wine , not a pint of beer .
A hydra is a snake right ?
It is false to assume that because we know how to use language , we understand how language actually works ( just like knowing how to use a car is no indicator that we can explain how one works ! ) .
A decision is a plan of action rooted in our comprehensive assessment of all actionable intelligence .
A flame is an object , a " thing , " something you can see , something you can touch ( but do n't do that because it is hot ) .
" A brother is a brother , but I could n't have asked for a better one than Ferb .
@ Ruben Dutch : Thanks , it was killing me not doing it , so I figured once a week was the antidote !
An agroforest is a man-made replica of a natural forest in structure and function , so an agroforest is an agroecosystem which , through the inclusion of trees , goes through an ecological succession akin to that in natural ecosystems - becoming more complex and biodiverse as it matures .
The operating system of a device is the part of the device responsible for basic use and administration .
A toolchain is a set of programs which allow you to compile source code ( any source code , not just kernels ) .
Bullying reports to the Department of Child Services and / or law enforcement must be made as required by law , such as when a staff member believes that a student is the victim of abuse or neglect .
A cap is a set of points with no three points lying on the same line .
Having a disease is an experience which varies with every individual .
A periodical is a gift that keeps on giving .
The only coupling that allows for children to know a mother and a father is the one between a man and a woman .
" I handed him the cash , relieved that a deal was a deal .
dialog A dialog is an application window that is designed to interrupt the current processing of an application in order to prompt the user to enter information or require a response .
grid A grid is an interactive control which contains cells of tabular data arranged in rows and columns , like a table .
] the nature of a thing being the source or cause of non-accidental change or rest [ ...
An activity is a chain of internal and / or external causal interactions describable through law-like claims , a kind of process able to determine the persistence of the object .
Let us return to the example presented by Wiggins : a clock is any time-keeping device , a pen is any rigid ink-applying implement .
What these examples therefore prove is that either induction of artefact kinds is generally not possible or that the strategy of characterizing artefacts through such a generic functional description ( by , for instance , stating that a chair is an object that has the function of being used for sitting upon ) is not the right strategy .
A bachelor is simply any human adult male who is not married , a widow is any human female whose husband is dead .
A low-rent example that works in a browser is this flight simulator , which lets you cruise around New York , LA or the Moon .
The first act of a creation is the formation of an egg , which rises upon the hands of Heh and Hehet out of the proto-matter .
An archive is a single file that combines many files , reducing storage space and allowing multiple files to be handled as one .
An example is a lawn rake with a somewhat Z-shaped handle .
Visitor : A visitor is a person who either travels outside of his or her " usual environment " for a period of less than 1 year or who stays overnight in a hotel or motel .
The incentive to create a job is the difference between what a worker will contribute to the business and what the worker has to be paid .
- The righteousness we are to put on as a breastplate is both our righteousness in Christ which the Bible calls Justification , and right actions , upright character , and moral behavior .
" The gamma knife is not really a knife-it 's an instrument that focuses radiation directly and precisely on the targeted area of the brain without affecting the surrounding healthy tissue .
Quoting the exact words of a source is a powerful way to support your thesis with other voices that are distinctive and eloquent .
A vision is a mental image .
Previously , if a woman was an heiress , she could only marry someone from within her tribe .
Michael , no doubt , " she thoughtfully remarked , " would finally convince the Emperor Hadrian that where a warlike despot is sown as the seed , a fortress and a prison are the only possible crop .
Other things we learned over the past few monthsÖ Brandy hates hoses , just the sight of them - we landscaped the back and well , a hose is the main tool for the gardens , an every day thing , she hides under the deck whenever it comes outÖ the good news , she no longer refuses to come back outÖ .
Large individual rooms and a bath were a counterpoint to the previous night and Janet was even spared the rite of passage of being third in the bath !
Insurance for Micro Car 0800 4791351 A microcar is an uncommonly small automobile .
The Sigma MC 74 powered by a Mazda 12 A engine was the first engine and team from outside Western Europe or the United States to finish the entire 24 hours of the Le Mans race , in 1974 .
The most interest as the month drew to a close was the first Least Black Arches of the season on 27th. May The first week of the month provided two further records of Scarce Tissue ( on 5th and 6th) .
An example of such a system is the automobile .
The only one that appears as a helicopter is the red warning for low oil pressure in bottom right corner .
An IAP is a written contractual-style agreement between the client and the welfare agency , which outlines actions to be taken by each party .
Rachel Wright , mother of baby Delilah , explained : " We have all found that whilst becoming a mum is an incredible experience it is also really hard work despite having all the luxuries of washing machines , heating , hot water , fridges and freezers and good local take aways on speed dial .
VOx , Jeremy 's way of working with someone who already has a relationship is a good suggestion .
To call him a maverick is a compliment - that is where the energy comes from - but he does not fit well into the environments that most teachers have to work in .
* Keep it open ended - a test is a test however it is dressed up .
Ammonia from a bottle is the best option though as you can control how much goes into the tank and its less mess .
a monument is the symbol of the village bell tower , built between 1898 and 1900 in the municipality of savior curse , inspired by the Eiffel Tower and the World Exhibition in Paris .
Just getting in the car as a passenger is a big challenge at the moment .
Well worth a visit is the coast road between Calais and Peuplingues ( or beyond ) which gives absolutely stunning views of the Channel .
The melancholy of A minor is a sign of this .
The only thing that even approaches such an event is the kind of cross special gene splicing that occurs via viruses .
" Saving £ 23,000 or more for a deposit is no mean feat , particularly if you let distractions get in your way .
To say he 's had this coming for a while is an understatement to say the least .
A lure is an intergral part of ones falconry gear .
Songs With a Story was a feature from the Xfm days in which Karl got to pick a song to be played .
Play in a week is a truly unforgettable drama experience course covering all aspects of acting technique , improv , characterisation and physical theatre .
At the time , a hat was an integral part of men and women 's clothing .
A prolactinoma is a non-cancerous swelling in the pituitary gland , which makes too much of a hormone called prolactin .
A prolactinoma is a benign tumour ( non-cancerous swelling ) in the pituitary gland .
( A hormone is a chemical which is made in one part of the body , but passes into the bloodstream and has effects on other parts of the body . ) Prolactin helps the body to produce milk when a woman breast-feeds .
A cheque is a nice little friend to have in emergencies to inbetween payments when money is a little tight you can ring up arrange an overdarft and write a cheque , guaranteed with the card secure in the knowledge it will be cashed .
We cannot force anyone to appear at an inquiry-that is a matter of choice-but the present arrangements for planning inquiries and the arrangements that would be used under the bill allow any person who wants to make their views known and to have them taken into account to do so without having to appear .
A man is a man , not a God .
A woman is a woman , not a Queen .
a demonstration is a protest to those who are responsible for such actions .
£ 250 for a male and £ 350 for a female are the average prices for a Harris straight from the aviary .
Richard Cunliffe , COO at FREEDOM 4 WiFi , comments , " To win this award two years in a row is a credit to our team at FREEDOM 4 WiFi and the operators we work with globally .
And the length of a boat is no guide as to it 's suitability for one purpose or another .
" A rave is the least violent place ever .
Courier In architecture , a courier is a continuous level range of brick or stones of the same height throughout the face or faces of a building .
Courier [ disambiguation ] A courier is a person , company or vessel that transports mail and small items .
Courier A courier is a person or a company who delivers messages , packages , and mail .
The nuclear divisions that turn one zygote nucleus into trillions of nuclei to make a baby are all mitotic divisions ( followed by cell divisions ) .
" The only people who have really begun to solve this problem of the attitude to a studio are some of the Reggae people .
His assertion that a studio is a musical instrument extends even further in that he also sees a group of people in the same light .
On the role they would most like to play , Marcus recalled Peter Hudson 's famous comment about what he looks for in a role is a sausage .
After all , BMI as a whole is a loss-making carrier .
" A studio is a situation with literally infinite possibilities .
Both his parents died of complications from Alzheimer 's Disease , and , being of the age where such a thing is a major concern , he is terrified that he will be next .
Having a child is a key event in anyone 's life , but arranging life insurance does not always top the to-do list .
I wrong 'd not you in that ; you will acknowledge A king is the best part o n't .
Running a railway is a job that requires consistency and a wide understanding of the industry .
Maybe eight hours a day is the best evolutionary balance for humans ?
This decision is also a good reminder that whether or not an agreement constitutes a guarantee is a matter of substance , not form .
A residency is a structured program over a set period of time , under the supervision of an existing specialist in a specific area of veterinary work , such as surgery or medicine .
Some have suggested that , psychologically , the human keeper of a cat is a sort of surrogate for the cats mother and that adult domestic cats live forever in a kind of suspended kittenhood .
The net foreign asset ( NFA ) position of a country is the value of the assets that country owns abroad , minus the value of the domestic assets owned by foreigners .
It sounds like she read in a book somewhere that staying silent a lot is a good way to deal with a sensitive situation .
Bringing proceedings to a close is the title track ' Beyond Daylight ' , which at just over the ten minute mark is the major work on the album .
For a pearl is both precious and the outcome of ' irritation ' to the housing ' oyster ' self .
Figure 3.5 Frequency of overnight stay Among children in the resident parent sample those who had direct contact with their non-resident parent less than once a month were half as likely as those who saw their non-resident parent more frequently to stay overnight with them .
Children who saw their non-resident parent less frequently than once a month were those most likely to have a responding parent who thought that the contact arrangements could be improved by the non-resident parent having more indirect contact with their child ( 23 % compared with less than one in ten children who either saw their non-resident parent more frequently or never saw them at all ) .
Also , make the switch to a milder soap ; switching to a cleanser is an even better idea .
Building in a natural valley or into a hill-slope is a good eco-friendly method as it does n't disturb the Nature and does n't involve groundwork .
An average is a single value that is meant to typify a list of values .
Middlerib read in his favorite paper a paragraph stating that the sting of a bee was a sure cure for rheumatism , and citing several 98 remarkable instances in which people had been perfectly cured by this abrupt remedy .
The fixing of bayonets before a battle was a precaution to ensure preparedness , not necessarily indicative of a conscious plan for their employment .
For some bloggers , paying a relatively small fee of $ 5 dollars a year is a pretty good deal .
The events , his killing and the use of force , is something that disturbed us and disturbed many people in Egypt , but the fact that there is a prosecution is a positive step .
[ 9 ] An experiment is a procedure carried out under controlled conditions to discover an unknown effect ; to provide confirming or disconforming evidence for a hypothesis , often based on whether a prediction of the hypothesis ensues ; or , to illustrate an accepted theory .
A prediction is a logical deduction from a hypothesis ( or theory ) by which the hypothesis ( or theory ) can be tested experimentally .
A ' test ' of a hypothesis is an experiment , the results of which might falsify ( disprove ) the hypothesis ; if the test does not falsify the hypothesis , the test is said to support ( ' confirm ' ) the hypothesis .
A paradigm is a logically consistent set of ideas that guides and constrains the work that scientists do .
A hypothesis is a proposed explanation of a phenomenon .
An experiment is a procedure carried out under controlled conditions to gain new information or better understanding .
An idol is an image , in this case held in the mind , which receives veneration but is without substance in itself .
It seemed like having a license was the ultimate key to freedom .
People are being burned , tortured and oppressed for their sexual orientation by real dictators ; to call our smooth-faced premier a dictator is a far greater assault on the English language than any redefinition of marriage .
@ Buck , tr 0 y : Dumping CSS and JS changes to a file is a great idea !
The " software industry " is massively decentralized , because every company with a computer is a software company .
Such a reader is a rare specialist indeed .
This should be handled by increasing the weapon skill ( accuracy with a weapon is a big part of the skill ) or , if absolutely necessary , a skill specialty .
A biblioclast is a person who destroys books for personal and professional reasons .
Recall that a gallop is a kind of run in which all four feet are off the ground in part of the step cycle .
For those who are appreciative of this truth , each test is one added feather to a wing that will enable him or her to take off to the realms beyond the heavens , and each difficulty faced during a test is an elixir of strength and vigor .
For a heart directed towards the highest of ideals , a test is a whip lashed on his or her perseverance , a spell that makes their willpower rear up , and a ray of light that shines on the dial of heart .
When you earn a background in business leadership , you learn why deciding on goals , methods and deadlines before embarking on a project is the key to avoiding conflict of this nature .
As you remember from class a character is a feature or thing which we can examine or label .
Dealing with MCUs like Arduino , you would need to be looking at signals and timing more often than levels and a scope is a wonderful tool for that .
A lagoon is a lake formed outside the ocean by sand spit , a reef , and a sand bank .
A person is a compound consisting of a external inventity , the person 's body , and a mental situation , the person 's mind 4 .
An action is a compound consisting of a external eventity , an agent 's bodily movements , and a mental inventity , a currently activated representation of a reward-oriented goal-state 5 .
The situation token of a near-proposition is an exclusive situation only , so its truth value must remain indeterminate until the situation is completed to become an inclusive situation .
The number of strides taken will be noted ( a stride is the distance from a homologous part of one footstep of one foot to the next footstep of the same foot ) as well as the total distince traversed , and the amount of time the traverse takes .
A steeple is a tower that may or may not be crowned with a spire .
But if a unique identity is required without being a property key , then an object is the right answer , not a symbol .
An identifier is a fine public name , better than a non-private symbol if bound in a namespace object or module -- or even if a global like JSON .
But if a unique identity is required > without being a property key , then an object is the right answer , not > a symbol .
But if a unique identity is required > > without being a property key , then an object is the right answer , not > > a symbol .
But if a unique identity is required > > > without being a property key , then an object is the right answer , > > > not a symbol .
But if a unique identity is required > > > without being a property key , then an object is the right answer , not > > > a symbol .
An identifier is a fine public name , better than a > > > non-private symbol if bound in a namespace object or module -- or > > > even if a global like JSON .
One I will always remember with a smile is a bedroom scene .
" A whestone is no karving instrument ...
The church as a whole is a masterly example of the work of Borromini , domestic architect of the Barberini family .
Also worth a visit is the working fishing harbour , fresh fish can be purchased from the boats as they come in with the days catch .
Since Wilde believes that " to discern the beauty of a thing is the finest point to which we can arrive , " it is not surprising that he regards art as the noblest calling of man , for it is only through art that a beautiful ( and therefore bearable ) world is possible .
A macromolecule is a very large molecule having a polymeric chain structure .
Committing an assault is a criminal offence , and should be prosecuted to the full extent of the law .
Every molecule of a chemical is the same , but humans are not all the same .
Visiting a farm is a great way to celebrate harvest season in South Carolina .
A database is a database and SQL is mostly SQL .
Running the myriad of applications we expect from a computer is a whole different ballgame .
A Curate is a priest employed as a substitute by a Rector or Vicar to conduct services and parish work during his absence .
Technically , a prebend is a fee for taking part in the governance of a cathedral or diocese .
A resolution is a pledge or promise to one 's self to make the new year a better one for ourselves and hopefully those all around us .
A little less rat race - who knows , maybe a time-out once a week is all it would take to save the planet .
A lottery is a tax on people who are bad at math , says a joke going round the Internet .
The book as a whole is a daring comparative study that successfully uses metis as a point of departure to bring together a number of interrelated texts and issues .
The fist thing many companies look at when looking to hire a firm is the cost .
Looking at SEO as an investment is the key .
It may be said , indeed , that such a revenue is the reward for the owner 's abstinence in not selling the dock or the canal and spending its price in enjoyment .
Many writers and readers of Political Economy forget that the clearest proof that absenteeism diminishes the virtue or the happiness of the remaining members of a community is no answer to arguments which aim only at proving that it does not diminish their wealth .
If an uppercut is the last hit on a cornered opponent on a finishing round , the fatality can be performed very quickly , and Kano will appear to grab a heart out of thin air , before the opponent gets up from the uppercut .
( This text is based on and partly quoted from professor John Fagans article " Tryptophan summary " ) EBT , the most prominent of the poisonous substances in the tryptophan supplement , was identified as a dimerization product of tryptophan ( a dimer is a molecule consisting of two identical parts - joined in this case by an ethylidene bridge ) .
Ignorance is n't the mentality of a scientist , and I find its damaging that you 're spreading BS about religion and science being able to co-exist when it ca n't , and such a notion is a hindrance to humanity 's advancement .
A meteor is a streak of light left by a small ( pebble sized or smaller ) particle as it enters the atmosphere = " shooting star " ; being so small , the particle is completely " digested " in the atmosphere ; meteor showers occur when Earth crosses the orbit of a comet .
A regularity is a law if it is a theorem of the best system .
There are formal systems that generate sentences from seed strings that are not sentences : for example , a grammar is a formal system that starts off with words as its seeds and describes rules for building sentences from them ; its " theorems " comprise all the sentences of a language , true and false .
Many authors still write stories in which the birth ( or discovery ) of a child is the pivotal development in the plot .
The views that more ( formal ) education is almost always a good thing and that the loans needed to finance it are " good debt " since it is an investment are both widespread and contribute to the problem .
We hide them in the ground : and the slight rains moisten them , and the Sun shines upon them , and little slender shoots spring up and grow ; - and what a miracle is the mere growth !
And what a mystery are the effects of heat and cold upon the wondrous fluid that we call water !
( As always , an attorney is the best source of answers for specific legal questions .
I think having a hobby is an essential part of life .
A midrash is a scholarly philosophy that 's used to teach others .
This should start when a child is a toddler , because it 's a heck of a lot harder to crack down on an older child who is already spoiled .
It 's not clear that disbanding these functions and giving away a coupon is a smart idea .
A conference is a private meeting of the nine Justices by themselves ; the public and the Justices ' clerks are excluded .
For example , it is common to say that the reason why you cannot maximize utility in such and such a case is that fact that the utility - maximizing course of action would involve infringing a right --- indeed , violating a right , since the right in question is a stringent one , and the utility to be got not sufficiently great to override the right .
" An inconvenience is an unrecognized opportunity .
A bank is a good place to have an introductory showing .
" He believes the majority of Americans agree with that position and do n't believe that building a fence is the right thing to do .
The penalty for disobedience to the command of such a subpoena is the same as for refusal to answer such a process issued under authority of the court of common pleas .
No doubt that the Scotts got it for free or something and it was their choice to let a reality show cater their reception ... still , a wedding is a special event .
Now getting along , working with others and REALLY being a team is another story .
Element This document uses the term " element " both in the strict SGML sense ( an element is a syntactic construct ) and more generally to mean a type of content ( such as video or sound ) or a logical construct ( such as a header or list ) .
A caption is a text transcript for the audio track of a video presentation that is synchronized with the video and audio tracks .
Many critics of Israel believe that such a statement is a cheap ploy to justify colonial ambitions , but right or wrong this is the reality of the country 's collective psyche .
A locale is a combination of language and regional dialect .
All that whacking away and touching up and changes made to a piece ARE the practice .
An experiment is a scientific procedure used to test a hypothesis , answer a question , or prove a fact .
Hypothesis A hypothesis is a prediction of what you expect will happen in an experiment .
A blog is a blog by virtue of what it is ( dynamic , engaging ) and the tools it uses to be those things ( such as permalinks ) .
Many more people now realize , for example , that saying illegal migrants will " pay back taxes " as part of balancing an amnesty is a misleading rhetorical point , and known to be so .
The pain of a loss is the pain of loss .
But it does n't matter whether a blogger is a journalist or not , Gorny said .
The lists of questions below will help you determine whether a class is a good fit for you and your dog or not .
Exiting wide and coming face-to-face with a car is an experience you do n't want to have !
The assessment of the ' educational validity ' of a course is a complex process for the more traditional methods , let alone for computer-based material where additional factors need to be evaluated .
Her readings of Henry Garnet ( ' a garneter was the overseer of a granary . . reinterpreted in terms of a sacred onomastic pun , Garnet ensured the fullness of the granary by being cut down ' ) and Thomas Pilchard ( ' while any name connected with fish could have strengthened a Catholic priest 's connection with the Apostles . .
An agnostic is a fence sitter unable to decide .
" An agnostic is a fence sitter unable to decide .
The X-ray is locally reinterpreted in such a way that it becomes an aid in revealing if an illness is a bodily disorder or grounded in disrupted social relations .
A bibliography is a list of books .
A biography is a person 's life story .
Renovated in 2000 , the air-conditioned hotel with a garden and a terrace is the best place to enjoy a holiday close to the sea , in a privileged located in the heart of nature and far from everyday stress .
Grafting a scion onto a rootstock is a much better way of cloning a fruit tree from a cutting than just getting the cutting to take root itself .
A maiden is the youngest & cheapest fruit tree you can buy .
This means the call for an imposition of a ceasefire is a dangerous step .
Not being able to afford such a holiday is a marker of poverty .
The problem with such a notion is the lurking question of negative equity being lumped onto the already overburdened shoulders of students and others starting out in life and perhaps wishing to plan families ?
A problem is that extent of light-fall off will vary with aperture , possibly also with focus distance .
On a par were the PES 38 mm muzzle can and Jet-Z Compact , which shows that a well-designed muzzle can with baffles forward of the muzzle still has a lot to offer at a good price .
A gastroscopy is an examination that directly views your gullet , stomach and duodenumThe first part of the small intestine .
It is not unusual to find a bankrupt residing in leasehold premises as the majority of flats and maisonettes and even some houses are occupied under lease rather than freehold , the usual term of such a lease being either 99 or 999 years .
( A covenant is a clause contained within a written agreement , whereby one party to the agreement binds him / herself to either doing or not doing something for the other person .
What makes this such a blockbuster is the fact that it is drawn by none other than George Perez , the master of including scads of heroes together in a single panel and making it look good .
As cozy as a warm embrace , a shawl is the perfect romantic gift to share before going out on the town , perhaps with some tickets to a show you 've purchased in addition to a shawl .
This was a system was an improvement upon the Punch Card system .
Such a divisor is called principal , that is , a divisor is a principal divisor if it represents the zeroes and poles of some rational function .
The point is that manageability of apps is not in and of itself a reason to resist the idea that feature rich apps that run locally on a device are a good idea .
Neither the German saying " An order is an order " nor the adolescent " Fuck you !
Some data seems obvious : a name is a name is a name .
But the most essential lack in a clone is the spiritual aspect that is inherent in a baby born from the egg and sperm of its parents .
A cookie is a small file placed on the hard drive of your computer .
Covering a mashup is a fun , interesting thing to do-I have seen some other artists doing this but now I ca n't think who .
Obvously I 'm not challenging this account of personal experience and preference , but is n't it usually clear when a footnote is a reference ?
Admitting you have made a mistake is a form of taking responsibility for your actions .
You know back then we really bought a lot more singles ( 45 s ) than albums because , like me , most kids had an allowance or cut grass for money and an album was a lot of cash .
As my wife , Tulane University 's former public relations director , is fond of saying , a disaster is no time to make new friends .
An Ed-U-Creationship is a project planning team consisting of a Da Vinci student , teacher , industry expert and university partner .
While there cannot be disagreement on the broad principle , I would be a little careful before coming to the conclusion that a client is a ' jerk ' .
This happens when an object is neither wholly glossy nor wholly rough .
The order of a unit is the number of steps this takes .
Or , looking at things the other way around , the only link whose presence in the user 's history can affect the style of an element is the nearest ancestor-or-self of that element that is a link .
As noted earlier , a port is a basic data type .
Let me start with this disclosure : Not only have I been a Thunder season ticket member since Earl Watson and Joe Smith were starters and some guy that looked like a librarian was the coach , I also worked for The Oklahoman for five years .
A university is a place where all speech should be welcome , no matter what .
Health care is not a right-it is a privilege , and the U.S. consumer must understand this .
But I would do it all over again , despite the problems in the system , as I still believe being a physician is a precious gift .
Because a village is a smaller grouping of people , it offers the ability to get to know your neighbors , to participate in things with them , and to plan and build larger camps , events and artwork than could be done by just a few people .
A prophet is a human mouthpiece for God , speaking the words God tells him to speak , when , where , and to whom the LORD tells him to speak .
( An alternative term could be ' sparse darknet ' . ) A greynet is a region of IP address space that is sparsely populated with ' darknet ' addresses interspersed with active ( or ' lit ' ) IP addresses .
I believe that to be a racist is a grave offense against God , humanity , and decency .
The people who make it an issue are the ones who are to blame .
An embyro is the epitome of the ' little guy ' .
Until recently , whether methylation at the p 16 ink 4 a promoter was a cause or consequence of gene silencing was unknown .
Flipping a coin is a game of chance ; but playing slots is falling for a scam - same way as putting money down on three card monte .
" A sign is an objective cause , not the principal objective cause , but a substitutive one , by reason of which a sign is said to be instrumental , not indeed as if it were an instrument of an acting agent , but as it is a substitute for an object , not informing as a specifying form , but representing from outside what it represents .
The mechanics of a filibuster are these .
A baby is a cure , as old-fashioned as the days of Eve , for a woman 's morbid ambitions .
Many textbooks make the mistake of regarding a - ko phrase like etxeko as a separate " locative genitive " case , but this is an error of analysis : such a form is a - ko phrase like any other .
The arm of Cape Cod shown as an island is a characteristic of Southack 's New England coast charts .
I think I agree -- but on the other hand , one could argue that a result is a value , and since there are no values of type void , we have a contradiction .
The result of dereferencing a pointer-to-T is a value of type T , not an expression of any kind .
The first sentence of 6.3.2.1 p 1 states : ' An lvalue is an expression with an object type or an incomplete type other than void ; if an lvalue does not designate an object when it is evaluated , the behavior is undefined .
Just try and get one ; Nissan 's very hot GT-R is a coupe is the wunderkind of those with the need for speed with its 480 - horsepower twin-turbocharged V 6 ready to get you down the road faster than anything else in the $ 70,000 price range .
What the A 4 offers a family is the enjoyment of having a performance oriented sedan with a deluxe interior , excellent fuel mileage , and a pleasant ride .
Under these circumstances a right is a right and not the gift of a particular government .
A biopsy is the sampling of tissue from the pancreas to be examined under a microscope by a pathologist .
A cyborg is a human-machine interface , or person and machine engaged in a feedback loop .
My definition of a cyborg is a bit more broad .
Since , by playing a sure bet , casinos are running a scam then a casino is no place to gamble .
Sound of a cough is a beautiful thing is n't it ?
A mantra is a sound without sense .
( A lymphocyte is a small white blood cell that 's involved in the body 's immune response to disease .
A fractal is a geometric pattern that 's replaced at an ever smaller scale producing irregular shapes and surfaces .
A week is a very long time in Northern Ireland politics .
We held that the Act was not unconstitutionally vague in its use of the term " substantially similar " with respect to a defendant who lacked actual notice that a substance was a controlled substance analogue .
One of the first proteins made by an embryo is a type of HSP similar to the one made by chlamydia .
And they know this push for a ban is a direct attack against the Jewish faith .
Teen Cia Vale is chosen for The Testing , the process that determines whether or not you get into college , in a society in which returning the earth to useful production after a war is the main occupation of every citizen .
A widget is a little chunk of code that people can place on their own blog or website .
In skill-focused leader train ­ ing , the assumption is that a leader is the sum of his or her capabil­ity to perform tasks .
An example is the World Business Forum , a traveling assemblage of the world 's most successful leaders who speak on leadership and leader development .
The law mandates attorneys ' fees for a winning party and often the threat of having to pay such an award is the only hammer requesters have in getting compliance .
The one national organization dedicated to passing such a tax is the Citizens Climate Lobby , which is active across the U.S. and Canada .
One of the most important benefits of joining a congregation is the mutual support that members can provide to each other .
Concerning ordinary smugglers , giving a bribe is the only solution to get the merchandise into the country .
Hemp as a ingredient being a BIG favourite .
A caravan is a wonderful second home and a perfect affordable base for an idyllic way of life .
A GSD is a guard dog they will back at anything that comes into or close to thier terit ory.Int s what every instinct in thier bodies tells them to do .
Such a vision is some way off but now Singapore 's Open University Degree Program is well established we can think together about the next steps .
humans are animals : unless someone can tell me different : an animal is a member of the animal kingdom animalia - taxonomic kingdom comprising all animals defined as - The members of this kingom are complex , multicellular , eukaryotic organisms that digest food outside their cells and then absorb the digested nutrients .
Common sense demands we ask whether an individual is a friend to American , Christian values or an enemy .
An anaesthetist is a doctor who has received specialist training in giving people anaesthetic .
If a dog is that easily ' broken ' by an owner 's reaction ( or non-reaction ) , the dog is probably a naturally super-sensitive soul in the first place .
Thanks , I was aware of the one at REME , so I guess a trip is the only answer .
The headline and article are confused and they illustrate the problem ; a student is a more mature person who accepts their own responsibility to study and learn and as such could have a say in who they learn from ; a pupil ( which is what the article is about ) is too young and immature and has to be taught , and therefore is in no position to decide who teaches them .
Incidentally , we are still old fashioned enough to believe that a school is a community of all its members .
4 poofs and a piano is the name of their group .
A phallus is an Erect Penis , a penis-shaped object , or a mimetic image of an Erect Penis .
A mouse was a quick snack .
Perhaps a neurologist is the doctor you should see Patti .
Ben Wishaw 's portrayal of Keats is restrained almost to an extreme ( " a poet is the least poetical creature on earth " ) and perhaps appealed to my liking of understatement .
A hysterectomy is an operation to remove your womb ( uterus ) .
Worst of all , though , is the presumption that a child is a diminutive adult .
But the fact you did n't give day 2 a go is a bit strange 100 % you 'll have 12 month bar so 12 months after your first is when you can expect a date i 'd say .
A child under the age of twelve , sharing a room with an adult is half price .
Adding a password is another way to insure files are safe from prying eyes and some compression programs let you do this at any level of compression or decompression with the associated commands ( update , move , feshien , add ) .
A stroke is a serious condition and can cause permanent disability .
Enjoy every moment with your child being a mum is the best thing in the world but make sure you dont let your child take over your whole life you are entitled to have fun and enjoy yourself being a mum should not stop any of that .
When a student is a primary wage-earner , it is often the case that they support the parents .
To Romeo and Juliet a kiss was a sign of love , fraught with longing and hopelessness .
A hobby is a regular activity done for pleasure - typically during leisure - e.g. , collecting themed items and objects , engaging in creative and artistic pursuits , playing sports .
[ A scruple is the smallest Roman unit of weight .
A conclusion states the outcome of your work whereas a summary is a brief statement covering the main points of the paper .
Of the wisdom concerned with the city , the practical wisdom which plays a controlling part is legislative wisdom , while that which is related to this as particulars to their universal is known by the general name ' political wisdom ' ; this has to do with action and deliberation , for a decree is a thing to be carried out in the form of an individual act .
" It 's to this extent , Aggivessana , that a monk is an arahant , one whose mental effluents are ended , who has reached fulfillment , done the task , laid down the burden , attained the true goal , laid to waste the fetter of becoming , and is released through right gnosis .
On Ujv & aacute ; ri 's account , a trope is a momentary , unrepeatable , abstract property particular ( not a particularized property ) individuated by reference to the thing that is its unique bearer .
One of the main components of a marriage was the exchange of the dowry between the husband and the wife or the wifeÕs guardian .
An allergen is a typically harmless substance , such as grass or dust , whic ...
The key property of a lens is the focal length fl which may depend on wavelength .
Reading this rich and complex passage , which taken as a whole is a great analogy , we must distinguish that element which expresses the human reality of interpersonal relations from that which expresses in symbolic language the " great mystery " which is divine .
However , rather than an instance being a traditional dungeon that you will spend several hours in , an instance might just be several minutes long .
So it does not necessarily mean that one litter a year is the answer .
Seacsub Seatil Tech by chrisheels A snorkel is a device for allowing you to breath air when you face is underwater .
Also , I 'd be a bit scared of spending that much money on anything at the moment , even the thought of spending that amount of cash on a deposit is a bit weird .
To participate as an amateur is a rich experience , and if the Music Manifesto was concerned solely with encouraging amateur fun its positive , enthusiastic approach would suffice .
The Links Effect : ADSL Wireless Draft-N Devices Computer Shopper 6 / 2007 - A router is the epicenter of any wireless network as it connects all your devices ( wired and wireless ) to your broadband service .
Starting a business is a natural and very important in the development any company that has the potential to become too large for a company .
And if we did benefit from a more permanent help , hiring a temp is the perfect way to investigate employees before extending the job offer .
Because surely a lesbian is a woman who sleeps with other women and it 's as simple as that .
But in Climates , when I acted , I had to use a cinematographer because I was acting and I saw that having a cinematographer is a better thing because you can of course dictate to him what to do - you yourself dictate the placing of the camera , or which lens should be used , then you can still control the image .
I 'm also surprised about a pacemaker being a routine day procedure !
But , if your idea of a zombie is the fast-running kind of the 2004 remake of Dawn of the Dead , then you 're going to need something suitable on your feet as you race down your local high street .
Note that the requirement for causing or enhancing an infestation is a stronger one than for ants acting to defend aphids .
The introduction of a TRO is a time consuming and staff intensive process and currently , this type of work is being prioritised in terms of potential casualty accident reduction benefit .
A draw is a stutter .
A defeat is a crisis .
A university is a place where people come to learn from each other and we should be creating these new spaces and programmes that recognise the value of developers in universities .
Participating in such a demonstration is a > criminal offence punishable by a fine of up to £ 1000 .
They were not the powers that had lived in the days of legends , indeed they were like candles next to a raging fire in comparison , but a threat was a threat , and so he 'd sent his War-Chief with a cadre of chosen veterans to take care of them .
How accurate a description is this ?
A tour is the easiest option here and can be easily organised through your guesthouse or hostel .
Due to the fact the most time-consuming aspects of a project are the css or the cms integration phase , experts need slicers and coders who do quality work in a short period of time .
In many cases , there are no signs that a pregnancy is a molar pregnancy , although you may get bigger more quickly than usual and suffer with bad morning sickness .
The definition of disability found in legislation says that a disability is any condition which has a significant , adverse and long-term effect on the person 's ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities .
How do I know if a book is a first edition ?
An inventor is a person who makes an ingenious arrangement of wheels , levers and springs , and believes it civilization .
In Italian , a belladonna is a beautiful lady ; in English , it 's a deadly poison .
A medal is a small metal disk given as a reward for virtues , attainments or services more or less authentic .
A wedding is a ceremony at which two persons undertake to become one , one undertakes to become nothing , and nothing undertakes to become supportable .
A Bus is either : 1 .
All that is needed to make premium high-speed rail travel a reality is the vision and commitment from the relevant manufacturers and operators .
For instance , if you use Apple 's popular iTunes Player to manage and download tracks , then an iPhone is a good choice to ensure compatibility .
Liking a book is an extremely personal thing - the publisher first of all has to be grabbed by the book , but also , because it 's a business and publishing is a very expensive process , the publisher has to ' see ' the book in the marketplace and know how the book can be marketed and the audience it will attract .
On the bare info you have given I would say the intention was to return and a suspension was the only action needed and therefore reinstating benefit on his return would have been simple .
And after you convince yourself that a lie is the truth and falsification reality , you can no longer make rational decisions .
The harnesses that should not pass an mot are the ones with the aircraft style release mechanism , your meant to have the normal seat belt type If , on your v 5 document , it says that your car is a 4 seater , then unless youve removed the rear seats your meant to have rear belts as well , should you take passengers .
An index is a great leveller .
As a result of the standard vaccination programme , many children 's illnesses , for which a rash is the first sign , are now very rare .
If the decision is made that a gate is the most suitable option , it should be designed to optimise ease of access and cause least restriction and inconvenience to path users .
What is the programme about ( be brief - a paragraph is all you need here ) ?
An example of such a scheme is the proposed Metrolink extension through Trafford Park to the Trafford Centre .
As well as a tendency to fade , one other notable characteristics of a quasi-hallucination is the loss of high spatial frequencies causing a certain fuzziness around edges and borders ( and reflects the shimmering of the Perky effect ) .
In the present context the hypothesis would be that , when specifically associated with animal outlines , such a feature was a means of testing or gauging the tangibility of animal representations in the face of the intangibility of pseudohallucinations .
" Excluding confectionery " simply means that confectionery does not count as food for the purposes of deciding whether a shop is a general store .
Sunbird , The A photograph and a curse are the only clues Dr Ben Kazin has before he stumbles on the archaeological discovery .
An onion and a skateboard are the source of lots of misunderstandings in this funny story .
So the only person that should get a grip is the person who holds Gareth 's spade before he enters a press conference and he should n't let go until Southgate has been safely escorted away from the media - failing that MFC should at least invite Norris McWhirter to verify that a record-breaking hole has indeed been dug .
11 Whether a criterion is a jurisdictional fact is a question of statutory construction .
You do " know " however , that a fire was no arson , by walking past !
A friend is a friend , period .
Surely , in your world , asking questions , and referring to what you said yourself , qualifies the asking person to being " an antisemite " , does that imply a liar is a semite ?
Any hopes of Mr Creosote being able to act as an alchemist and turn base metal into goals are now in tatters , and predictably so : the notion that a collection of crocks , cloggers and clowns were suddenly going to be miraculous transformed into Barcelona by the very presence of a deity was a collective delusion .
A similar idea is expressed by many who only ascend by proxy , and who imagine that the delights of a hill are a definite concrete entity , capable doubtless of being retasted , but essentially the same .
In a sense simply to be named as a rapist is a massive punishment , especially for someone with a career and a reputation ( of sorts - he was pretty rubbish in Boheme at Covent Garden ; OTOH , there is a West End restaurant that gives him iconic status , bizarrely ... ) .
Wed , 21 Mar 12 Nokia May Turn Tattoos Into More Than Body Art uriblank Today a tattoo is a popular way of showing off a little individuality , but historically tattoos were used as a form of communication .
The essence of a penalty is a payment of money that intimidates the offending party .
The question of whether a predetermined sum is or is not a penalty is a question of construction : in construing the clause a court will consider all the facts surrounding the negotiations at the time the contract was entered into , not at the time of the breach 4 .
Further , undue emphasis should not be attached to the challenging party being an articulate , intelligent person who did not have to enter into the contract as it was found that such a person was equally entitled to rely on the fact that a provision in an agreement was a penalty if it did not represent a genuine pre-estimate of loss .
" * Cole J in Multiplex Constructions Pty Ltd v. Abgarus Pty Ltd ( 1992 ) 33 NSWLR 504 From the above , it may be the background relationship between the contracting parties ( i.e. their relative bargaining position and whether or not there was an opportunity to negotiate a term ) could possibly be one of the factors considered by the courts in determining whether a sum is a penalty or not .
Also , on a table was a gigantic , ginger suppository ...
FJ : No , an officer was the closest thing to God in those days .
Becoming a muslim is a good ECONOMIC decision for the Chinese and Muslims ... who cares about Islam as a religion ( nobody really know what your heart says about your belief system , right ?.
Becoming a muslim is a good ECONOMIC decision for the Chinese and INDIANS in Malaysia ... who cares about Islam as a religion ( nobody really know what your heart says about your belief system , right ?
Resolution is the process in which an identifier is the input - a request - to a network service to receive in return a specific output of one or more pieces of current information ( state data ) related to the identified entity : e.g. , a location ( URL ) .
Handle is used by IDF under licence from the Corporation for National Research Initiatives , who have certain intellectual property claims to protect the misuse of the Handle System ; intellectual property ( IP ) is assigned to , jointly and solely , IDF and EDItEUR and made available freely but under stated terms to others ( an example being the RDD work contributed to MPEG 21 ) .
If a table is a Flashback Data Archive and you specify a time for it that is earlier than its creation time , the query returns zero rows for that table , rather than causing an error .
Let me conclude by saying that DDOE is looking at the current economic crisis with the perspective that " A crisis is a terrible thing waste " .
But most of do a quick practicallity check to decide whether an idea is a proposal or a novel plot point .
He also constructed a distillery and for a time was the largest producer of whiskey in the United States , cranking out 11,000 gallons in 1799 alone .
Our triumphant success as a nation is a glorious vindication of the objects for which they fought .
To check if an object is a data variable , look for a return type of SOT_data from src_type ( ) .
I 'll have to be pushing on my way ; for the early hours of a case are the precious ones , as no man knows better than your own self .
You can tell whether an item on a page is a link by moving the mouse pointer over it .
Links may also appear as buttons and as graphics : In any case you can tell a link is a link by the mouse pointer changing form when it is guided over the link .
Every long-term contract for a pitcher is a risk because of the injury factor .
Archiving such a site is a resource and a challenge .
Bromley , Greater London - For most people buying or selling a home is the most important transaction of their lives - learn more about how we can help .
In this context a dactyl is a metrical foot of three syllables , the first syllable long and the second and third syllables short .
If such a message is an update , it should be multicast as this may update other sites with out of date information .
In fact , if such a message is a retransmission request , it should also be multicast , as then the reception of the request can be used at other sites to suppress their retransmission requests .
Hi Russell , No , no , I did n't mean to imply you were trying to make money off her - I meant the " dog breeding industry " as a whole is a dirty business .
" To say that [ Alex ] Ferguson has treated the pampered multi-millionaire Ronaldo as a slave is a disgusting insult .
In text mining , a feature is a word or group of words extracted from a text document .
An example is the Tenant Led Improvement Programme which has as its objective the involvement of tenants in choice about the improvement of their own houses .
Lack of treatment , starvation and simply not being able to flee in the face of an attack are some of the reasons for disabled children not surviving .
A reference in a previous Action Briefing to " suits " , meaning some corporate b * * * , drew accusations that I and others here think that anyone who wears a suit is a corporate b * * * .
Also worth a visit is the souk behind the mosque - it has separate sections specialised in selling particular products and has over the years increasingly focused on tourism .
Also worth a visit are the islets of Zembra and Zambretta on Cap Bon , both easily accessible by boat from the nearby town of Sidi Daoud .
An eLibrary is a collection of electronic records used to organize and manage born digital resources ( websites , ebooks , mp 3 ) and as a meta-data proxy for books , magazines , physical video and audio , and other physical objects .
A rod is an ancient land measurement of approximately 5 m in length , a square rod being 25 square meters and a ' 5 rod allotment ' being 125 square meters .
A hectare is a metric unit of area equivalent to 0.01 square kilometres , 10,000 square metres or 2.471 acres .
A conclusion is the place where you got tired of thinking .
A flashlight is a case for holding dead batteries .
The latter , as an institution , dates from 1550 , as an edifice is a quadrangular structure , and has been restored and enlarged .
You can check whether an account is an administrator in the Accounts section of System Preferences 1 .
A cookie is an alphanumeric text file that is sent from a web site and stored on your computer 's hard drive by your web browser .
Building a profile is a very useful thing to do .
A changel is the paradigm .
A lovie was the aiyana .
The fee to record a sire is a minimum of £ 20.00 .
Millions of people have , like Liebknecht , been inspired by " A Man 's A Man 's " uplifting conclusion .
An ellipsis is the omission of a word or words from a piece of text .
A parenthesis is an explanatory phrase inserted into a sentence that could otherwise exist without this phrase being inserted .
If you then follow the question after that , how much follow-up is there by colleges of people who are coming into a college and attending and so on , not a lot is the current state of affairs , but we think if there is a proper ID card regime that will help .
A position is an x , y pair of numbers , interpreted as Cartesian coordinates in a plane .
It was decided in R v McCormack [ 1969 ] 2 QB 442 that a charge of unlawful sexual intercourse necessarily included an allegation of indecent assault ; it was also decided in that case that penetration of the vagina with something other than a penis is an indecent assault unless done with valid consent , even if there was no evidence of compulsion or hostility .
GCSE in a Week is a cramming-style book , written by staff from a leading tutorial college , which concentrates on examination technique with sections on improving and testing your knowledge .
GCSE in a Week is no diluted textbook but offers clear , sound advice .
But the question is whether such a threat is a threat to the life of the nation .
A friend is the one who comes to the police station at 3 am to pay your bail , a best friend is the one who is sitting next to you in the cell saying " dude , did you see that ?!!
are journey impression and reported a write is the southernmost point of their own territory .
A cyst is a fluid-filled sac .
An aneurysm is a localised swelling of a blood vessel .
Let me give Nadeem a little clue , when a country is a subsidy junkie you ditch it as fast as possible but maybe England knows a little too much about Scottish genius to be so stupid as to do that .
In the Obviously , Ministers and officials need to operate as a team-that 's a given-and they need to do that very effectively , as the Minister has described .
The one that was always given to me as an example was the Pergau Dam , when you had two people with very high integrity-Tim Lankester as the Permanent Secretary , Douglas Hurd as the Foreign Secretary-and it was an issue where , from the development side , it was regarded as not good value for money , and Douglas Hurd said that , actually , there were political objectives that overrode that .
We noted in Chapter 2 that the modern schools as a whole are the most homogeneous element among English schools - the children of non-manual workers are much under-represented , and the children of semi-skilled workers over-represented .
However , given the background on learning disability-its recognition in the Bill and the way in which it is dealt with in the 1983 Act , which I will mention in a moment-this is a special case .
The Chief Exec announcing the result without a vote was a highlight , " they might do that in other countries but ...
SAR is measured in Watts per kilogram of tissue 3 - A glioma is a tumor of the glial cells in the brain .
Colloquially it is referred to as brain cancer 4 - A meningioma is a tumor of the meninges that surround the brain and spinal cord 5 - The pituitary ( master ) gland is located at the skull base .
Gates , I 'm not interested in learning computer science today , being a typest is a minimum wage job and all scool students are expected to do it for free .
If the internet service provider believes that there are significant reasons of public interest that justify publishing the unidentified material-for example , if a whistle-blower is the source-it should have the right to apply to a judge for an exemption from the take-down procedure and secure a " leave-up " order .
Join CAMRA to help : uriblank We also campaign to try to prevent pubs from closing down as often a pub is a focal point for a local community and once a pub is closed down it seldom reopens .
On its valley floor stands the symbol of religious order , a place were a sacred fire burned continuously upon a ceremonial mound 190 ft. long , 150 ft. wide and 20 ft. high .
Since the concept of a reason is a nonnatural concept , and irreducibly so , rightness , on Stratton-Lake 's view , is a complex nonnatural property .
An internship is a temporarily position at a fashion house , company or brand with the focus on training rather than employment .
A family is a unit composed not only of children but of men , women , an occasional animal , and the common cold .
" A pattern is a message , and may be transmitted as a message .
The nucleus of a cell is a control center which determines how these substances will be combined .
GENES A gene is a short section of a longer DNA molecule .
" [ 16 ] The second is that an image is a form of retrievable storage for " .
A pick is a swimming manoeuvre by two adjacent attacking players to block a defender and create a two-on-one situation .
A screen is an attacking move where a driver swims by a teammate who blocks off the drive defender ; when the defender is blocked even for a short time , the driver stops behind his teammate for a pass and shot .
It was often said on the ward that if being an asshole was a mental disease then Paxton would never be cured .
Toward education marriage nervous breakdown , operation , teaching school , and learning to be mad , in a dream-what is this life ?
But neither a " white lie " nor a half-truth is the whole truth - anything short of the whole truth is a deception .
" In days of yore publishing a book was an expensive and time - consuming undertaking .
Space permitting , an armoire is a great way to organize your jewelry .
A parametrization is a birational map from the projective line ( = the field of constants union { infinity } ) to the algebraic curve .
A different way to show information about a singularity is the plot_knot command .
A vocation is an individual call by God to one 's state in life as well as one 's particular responsibilities .
The most impressive feature of the collection as a whole is the range of positions represented .
If a state is a valuable state to attain , then it would be a noteworthy discovery that we could not have it , even if no one had ever used the notion of such a outside of philosophical discourse .
A debate is a persuasive speech .
The basic features of an ellipse are the major axis , minor axis , center and foci .
He stated that the orbit of a planet is an ellipse with the Sun at one focus .
Longer Antennas may emit no more power in the direction of the receiver and thus give the impression they emit less energy which is false ( hence the illusion an antenna is a resonating device , which is false too ) .
Amendment A 259 is about the assistant and seeks an assurance that an assistant is an appropriate person to help with an inspection and investigation .
Imagine for a moment being a Liberal Democrat .
Thus the idea that a city is a cacophony of processes appears unexceptional but the key point is that it allows full reign to relational thinking .
Modernism has a famous motto : A house is a machine for living in .
An example is the company Flix which often works closely with post-production on BBC shows .
Large positive values imply that a city is an important articulator of this component .
A yoke is a large wooden implement of fruitful labor : " Come to me , all who labor and are over-loaded , and I 'll give you rest ; take my yoke on you and learn from me , and you 'll find rest for your soul , for I am meek and lowly at heart : for my yoke is easy and my burden is light .
A sect is a cult with an army .
Formally , the value of a building is the discounted value of anticipated future cashflows .
The advice of a friend is a great blessing : ' Just as lotions and fragrance give sensual delight , a sweet friendship refreshes the soul ' v. 9 , MSG ) .
A network is a collection of transmitters , receivers and transceivers that communicate with each other .
A channel is a division in a transmission medium so that it can be used to send multiple streams of information .
Essential to achieving this is a manager who models high standards , recognises that managing a nursery is a learning journey for the whole team , is prepared to take the lead and is confident enough to request and accept advice and support from other agencies .
An opportunity is the chance to introduce a new product or service that can generate superior returns .
By 83 ' Beki Bondage started wearing dresses with weightlifting studded belts on stage and the price of a pint was the cost of a Mars bar today .
If you are uncertain whether a conviction is a spent conviction or sentence then you can get more advice from your local Citizens Advice Bureau or probation service , or from NACRO ( the Association for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders ) .
A piconet is an ad-hoc computer network , using Bluetooth technology protocols to allow one master device to interconnect with up to seven active devices .
The JAMC has now qui­etened down after the hectic deployments of Ops JACANA and FINGAL where seventy aircraft a month were the norm .
Technically , a calorie is the amount of heat that is required at the pressure of one atmosphere to raise the temperature of one gram of water by one degree Celsius .
To us regular folk , a calorie is a unit of energy in the foods that we eat .
Such a surface is an important infection control measure .
In the collateralized lending business , in which the Federal Reserve traffics , a haircut is the margin of safety the lender demands for a loan against the re-sale value of the collateral .
Exactly what it is , a carb sync or " balance " An injector is an electrical device which cannot be balanced .
GCCI managing director John Cripps said a merger was the only way forward , admitting the chamber had made a loss last year and membership had become difficult to maintain .
A wigwam is a well built , insulated wooden hut that provides a more comfortable alternative to traditional tent camping .
An ebook is the perfect way to reach the largest audience of bonsai enthusiasts .
A thumb is a perfect representation of its best feature , its minuscule size and weight .
" Rather perversely , I found that the crits where you get a bit of a slating are the most useful ones , " says Love Creative 's Simon Griffin .
An example was a person with high dependency health care needs who had a nutritional guide based upon Dietician input and a Speech and Language Assessment .
An example was a person with dementia care needs , constantly moving around the home and refusing to have lunch is given food on the move - that she can choose and take with her - her weight is closely monitored .
More often than not , those cars that perform well on a track are a pain ( literally sometimes ) to drive in on our roads .
To be born a gentleman is an accident .
An argument is an art form which , if carried out efficiently , can be a useful way of understanding how people feel , as well as acting as a vehicle by which to make positive changes in a relationship .
There is a lot of duplication , and it 's debatable whether News 24 being on 24 hours a day is a luxury or not .
The ability to fork a project is the fundamental right at the heart of open source software .
A fork is a divergence .
A pilgrim is a seeker ... someone who seeks something larger than the life one is living .
Making Durban a success is a daunting challenge , and even more so for the conference 's hosts , South Africa - logistically , substantively , and diplomatically .
Likewise , a culture is a true culture-a healthy culture , a human culture-in large part to the extent that it is open to what is different than itself .
A brand is the culmination of all of the interactions that all the people in a marketplace have with the firm .
Honestly , the only thing that scares me about coming off a bye-week is a slow start .
As much as I love that Scottish bastard , I do n't think the presence of gadgets in a film is a sufficient excuse for a professional actor to phone in a performance .
A cookie is a small text file sent by a website to be stored on a computer so the site can identify a user when she returns .
An attitude is an internal state that can be inferred from a behavior ; therefore , attitudes can be measured by the choices an individual makes ( Gagne and Briggs , 1979 ) .
For Bill O ' Really (?) to call anyone a liar is a joke .
A highlight is the display of a monumental thangka , measuring over 20 feet in height , depicting the Buddha of the Future , Maitreya , flanked by the Eighth Dalai Lama , Jamphel Gyatso , and his tutor , Yongtsin Yeshe Gyaltsen .
A birthday is a celebration of a life in progress , but it is also a reminder that all of us are getting older .
] In a non-jury trial , the credibility of a witness is a matter for the trial court to determine and the court can accept or reject the testimony of a witness in whole or in part .
It is true , a lie is a lie .
[ 22 ] The complainant contended that the item had breached Standard 2 ( law and order ) because " using alcohol ( or drugs ) while handling a firearm is a criminal offence and in contravention of the Arms Code " .
I 'm a 40 year Falcon Fan so I guess I 'm a glass is half empty guy by nature .
" A pendulum is an object hanging from a fixed point that , when pulled back and released , swings due to the forces of gravity and inertia .
" Frankly , giving up after a day-and-a-half is a fairly shitty effort , but fortunately for the Coopers , Jack was a good deal more tenacious than his feeble owners .
An accident is an accident .
A press-conference is a low cost , soft introduction .
A windmill is a process that starts with a line \ ( \ ell \ ) going through a single point \ ( P \ in \ mathcal S \ ) The line rotates clockwise about the pivot \ ( P \ ) until the first time that the line meets some other point belonging to \ ( \ mathcal S \ ) .
A brand is a promise of value to customers , and it sets a certain expectation .
What I think is bad is the fact that it 's a business , a pharmacist is a business .
Keeping everything to a minimum is a simple and effective solution .
Some times , the most appropriate way to play a selection IS the ' fake it ' approach .
Kenneth Tynan , the doyen of theatre criticism , once said : " A critic is a man who knows the way but ca n't drive the car .
You can dispute whether a question is a good fit for SO 's rules , and I will not argue with you .
Indeed , looking for a job is a job , so do n't take a few days off ( for example , the weekend ) from your search .
Getting the right parties to agree to the above and allow a playoff is the hard part .
This month may yet prove to me that two books a year is a more reasonable expectation than three .
A poem is a piece of writing that is NOT prose .
A poem is an imaginative piece of writing .
Loren : We saw how the size of a draftsperson was a factor in other ways , too .
( Hint : For the two or three people who read this blog and have actual jobs , trying to write a poem is a great way to kill the last couple of hours at work on a Friday ) .
A year is the benchmark of an amount of time that , by its nature , is a Very Big Deal .
And looking at the whole year in a snap is a little like looking at the Grand Canyon .
A smoker was a patient smoking one or more cigarettes per day or a pipe daily or who had stopped smoking within the past 3 months .
" - Gertrude Stein cf. the science of linguistics cf. " A failure is a project that does n't work , an initiative that teaches you something at the same time the outcome does n't move you directly closer to your goal .
What separates a leader from a manager is the quality of an editor .
Dedicated to his work as a classicist are the contributions of Mark Griffith ( who dwells on the two main phases , or modes , of Murray 's career as scholar , pp 51 -80 ) , Christopher Collard ( on his critical editions , pp 103 -132 ) , James Morwood ( on the translations of tragedies , pp .133 -144 ) and Robert Parker ( on the writings on Greek Religion , pp 81 -102 ) .
Testing for a certain type I basically never write tests that verify the result of a function is a certain type .
To many people , a book is a rectangular thing made up of paper with black squiggles on it .
A scene is a unit of action within a chapter .
I realize that this is not an Evo-there 's an Evo X for that-but the deflated expectations represented by that sweet , sweet shift knob pretty much sum up my opinion on the Ralliart so far .
Winning the young competition two years in a row was both completely unexpected and a phenomenal feeling .
The scholarship had ended , and the work required to generate a salary was a full-time proposition , leaving little time to work on Moodle .
If a visit to a spa is all about feeling good , why should n't that include your taste buds ?
A kitchen is an important part of the house , and so are the items that make up the kitchen .
On the contrary , maintaining proper structures to ensure that legitimate political protest can find a voice is a positive duty of Government .
They find that the experience of playing in a group is both valuable and enjoyable .
It took us five hours to get there and I think it should have taken about one , but the feeling of having got somewhere without paying a penny is a pretty good feeling .
So I consulted an Oxford Dictionary , which advised me that a Cenotaph was an empty grave .
[ / quote ] Hi The Party Wall Act 1996 refers to a party fence wall as : A wall is a \ " party fence wall \ " if it is not part of a building , and stands astride the boundary line between lands of different owners and is used to separate those lands ( for example a garden wall ) .
The Party Wall Act 1996 refers to a party fence wall as A wall is a \ " party fence wall \ " if it is not part of a building , and stands astride the boundary line between lands of different owners and is used to separate those lands ( for example a garden wall ) .
Hi The Party Wall Act 1996 refers to a party fence wall as : A wall is a \ \ \ " party fence wall \ \ \ " if it is not part of a building , and stands astride the boundary line between lands of different owners and is used to separate those lands ( for example a garden wall ) .
The Party Wall Act 1996 refers to a party fence wall as A wall is a \ \ \ " party fence wall \ \ \ " if it is not part of a building , and stands astride the boundary line between lands of different owners and is used to separate those lands ( for example a garden wall ) .
" The traditional definition of a tenancy is a grant of land for a term at a rent with exclusive possession .
And he cannot be other than a tenant , because a legal right of exclusive possession is a tenancy and the creation of such a right is a demise .
Webster tells us a foundation is the " basis .
" A refuge is a place of hiding , a place of protection .
A win is a win at the end of the day , however it 's achieved , and this one propels the Toffees into the top half of the league .
Writing a novel is a tremendously rewarding experience .
An example is the German National Library , Leipzig , which makes nearly 25 million pieces of media available to its users , along with the Jacob-und-Wilhelm-Grimm-Zentrum of the Humboldt University of Berlin ( The Grimm Library ) and the Berlin State Library .
Taking one Kalms Day tablet three times a day is a herbal way to help you cope with periods of stress and irritability .
The suit has no pocket for a hive tool , but then I think putting a sharp hive tool in a pocket is a recipe for disaster anyway .
So to offer food meant for a dog is a HUGE insult to them .
" We see an individual was a micromanager in more ways than we previously understood , " understood , " jordan concord 11 understood , " said Seth Jones , author of the just-released book " Hunting the Shadows : The Pursuit of al Qa ' ida Since 9 / 11 .
The electrical_name of a device is the name of the device based on how it is connected to the system .
The electrical_name of a host_adapter is the name of the device based on how it is connected to the system .
A sister is a wonderful thing and a lovely struggle , there 's always a blanket hog .
The AA 2 A project is a national set of schemes , providing visual artists and designer-makers with the opportunity to undertake a period of research or realise a project , using workshop and supporting facilities in fine art and design departments of Higher and Further Education institutions .
By conventional definitions , a material is a substance useful for making objects , and " nano " describes something extremely small .
" Other definitions logically follow this approach such as a nanocrystalline material is " a material that is comprised of many crystals , the majority of which have one or more dimensions in the order of 100 nm or less ; " and a nanocomposite is a multi-phase material in which the majority of the dispersed phase components have one or more dimensions in the order of 100 nm or less .
An Apprenticeship is a training programme that allows you to earn whilst you learn .
" We 've played better - but a win is a win and the fact that we held our nerve and got home suggests we 've got a more belief even when we 're not playing well .
I was thinking we would win big like we did on our last visit to Fratton Park but 0 -1 will do a win is a win .
A progID is a string used to uniquely identify an OLE automation class in the Windows registry .
What makes the book succeed as a whole is the adjacency of the legal analyses and academic arguments with the personal accounts .
The UN 's Global Compact states forming a union is a universal human right .
Basically , Moravec assumes that a cell is a cell , working in isolation , operating solely on information electrically conducted through its fibers and junctions .
We had much bigger DP 's required back then , which is why I suggested to DINKS last year [ conventional wisdom ] that buying a house was an incredible deal that happens once in a lifetime .
An arrhythmia is a problem with the rate or rhythm of the heartbeat .
This law - That which allows them to issue such a law is the two articles from the constitutional memorandum that were not part of the referendum .
Did you know a tie was the original Father 's Fay gift ?
If being a woman is all about bleeding , then she 'll bleed .
Another prize that I think reflects the values you find important in a competition is the D-Prize .
The District Court said that what imprinted every action thereafter with defiance in a taint is the mere posting of the first display .
As you participate in other development projects such as research , design , name , tagline , concept portfolio and enhance which contributes the remaining 59.5 % , you will increase your share of influence 5 % of total revenue of a product is a lot if your idea or invention sells like hot cake .
A persona is a detailed description of a user the team wants to ensure is successful on the site .
Would n't such a tool be a better solution than passing laws that would hurt individuals with legitimate lawsuits ?
a fractal is a geometric shape that can subdivided into parts , each of which is a reduced-size copy of the whole .
" He continues : " Life as a whole is a battlefield .
A drug is no cure for poor medical care .
Prior to the appointment , I asked that only a female be the person touching me .
Or the delightful nonsense lyrics of " Three Girl Rhumba " ( " a numbah 's a numbah " ) providing contrast to some of the darker material .
An interface is a kind of language -- a set of conventions for communication between two entities , human or machine .
A command is a scripted method or compiled command class implementing a specified method signature .
A tuple is a two dimensional array of bytes .
An example of a parasite is the flea that lives on a dog .
The hiring of an attorney is an important decision that should not be based solely on advertisements .
" I 'm not sure if discovering that I 'm living in a prison was a blessing or a curse , " he says .
" In fact , the decision to withdraw from a conference is a reasonable way to express one 's political views .
Whether you 're traveling alone , with your sweetheart for a honeymoon or special anniversary or making it a family event , taking a cruise is a great vacation choice .
Just because Ambrose was an asshole was no reason his team should go into something blind .
However , it should be noted that criminal activity does not automatically warrant a diagnosis of APD , nor does a diagnosis of APD imply that a person is a criminal .
Dress up as their favorite princess or story hero , kid-friendly computer lab , music stations , dance floor , a lounge and a stage are some of the activities offered .
A sporran is a type of pouch traditionally worn with a kilt .
And do you believe in swine flu or is that just a distraction being a pig shill ?
In the case of JGAP , a grid is a distributed computing environment where as many independent computers as possible work on a set of problems .
The emergence of the first mass movement in the heart of world imperialism in more than a generation is a development whose significance cannot be overstated .
Such a scheme is the main original contribution of the book and its main components are presented in chapter 2 after a short introduction to the different waves of neuroeconomics ( in chapter 1 ) .
Iran 's single party system , at no time meant multiple ideologies were banned , in practice Rastakhiz was a multi-ideology party where both left and right ideologies made up the single party , so freedom of thought an expression were the cornerstone of the Rastakhiz system .
Rational analysis is a skill : a skill is an ability to do a certain type of complex behavior , such as to repair an automobile , so to do we learn how to apply logical and its complex brother scientific analysis to phenomena .
Propinquity : The closer in time a reinforcer is the greater is the probability that it will effect behavior .
The mere mention of the subject of kidpooling ( Counting children to determine if a car is a carpool ) makes the blood boil in the local newspapers .
A bank is a place tht will lend you money , if you can prove you do n't need it .
Barnstable once spent something like $ 100,000 to prove that a river was a river .
We can move beyond referring to mothers , because not everyone who gives birth and parents a child is a mother .
If a journalist is a freelance employee , the media organization may have less authority to demand that a journalist identify a source or turn over journalistic material to comply with a court subpoena .
A note is a loan .
How big a step was this for people to take ?
The TwHP lesson plan that I will be using as a reference is The Trail of Tears and the Forced Relocation of the Cherokee Nation .
Too many Christians actually believe that a person is a Christian if they just profess a belief in God .
An alternative is the MeURLin project .
Do you really need an explanation about why combining leather , a bottle opener and a gadget is a great idea ?
A game is a machine , but a book is never a machine .
A submarine is a tricky location to work in - unlike a gallery , there 's no easy way to pop back and fix things .
One thing sure to start an argument is a ' best of ' album .
A strength of Katherine as a filmmaker is the use of pop songs in her films .
Alan Riding in the New York Times on Girl With a Pearl Earring : " For many artists the very act of painting a woman is a form of making love .
a leash is the safest way to keep your pet safe and feeling secure and protect your dog and other peoples dogs .
A vivid example of women performing such a role is a daughter of Danish king Hrothgar , Freawaru : " At times the famous queen , peace-pledge of the people , went through all the hall , cheered the young men ; often she would give a man a ring-band before she went to her seat .
A dictionary is an unordered set of key : value pairs , with the requirement that the keys are unique .
Ohnuki-Tierney ( 1993 ) outlines that the act of knotting ( musubi ) a string was a ritual act to encapsulate a soul on a knot , but also has other meanings like production and reproduction of the polity and nature ( Ohnuki-Tierney 1993 : 49 ) .
Owning and driving a car is a privilege , not a right , and responsibilities come with that ie keeping to the advised speed limits .
A survey of 1999 graduates three years after graduation , Class of '99 , found that they felt having a degree was an advantage in the workplace in terms of key skills such as writing , analysis , problem-solving and presentation .
Ladder Safety - Before accepting that a ladder is the suitable means of access to a place of work , consideration should be given to provision of a more permanent means of access .
The duty of care owed by an employer to an employee is an individual one .
' An exhibition is a display , a performance ... and in " China : The Three Emperors , 1662 -1795 " , we are presented with paintings , dress , porcelains , lacquers and furnishings that the rulers themselves employed in elaborate performances .
Having this as the ideology of a society is a paradox in that this ideology is itself destructive of society .
Holding a barbecue is a great way to get friends and family together , and if you are something of a culinary aficionado , or like to be the host with the most , it is worth splashing out on high-end BBQ equipment .
One has broadly pro-Solidarity motives ; another is a proto-capitalist ; a third is the son of a Communist official .
A cruise is a wonderful opportunity to relax and enjoy a bit of pampering - and Sea Princess wo n't disappoint in this regard .
4.2 Brighton as a whole is an example of what Shields ( 1991 ) formulates as being ' a place in the margins ' , part of the alternative geography of modernity , a site of the carnivalesque , a marker of difference , and a place of permissive licence for otherwise forbidden desires .
The matter density of a neutron is a bout 3 x 1014 that of water .
" 5949 | Then another asked , 5950 | " Elders , 5951 | excuse me , " 5952 | and continued , 5953 | " Well now , 5954 | when a man 's an initiate 5955 | and his wife stops menstruating , 5956 | they pour water on her 5957 | Why is it 5958 | they do this ?
DOS 's previous use of Cardno-Entrix as a contractor was a conflict of interest and clearly favored TransCanada 's interests at the expense of citizens , our land and water .
A man-child is a man that pays his bills , takes care of his family , and just happens to enjoy dressing up like superheroes while they plan their family vacation around the San Diego Comic Con schedule .
What it actually means : An interrobang is a punctuation mark ‽ designed for use especially at the end of an exclamatory rhetorical question ( I like that in the definition I read , they include ' rhymes with orangutan .
A podcast is a collection of digital media files which is distributed over the Internet using syndication feeds for downloading and playback on personal computers or portable media players .
Learning to think of writing as a process was an important start .
With respect to the typical feature of " (self-)government " , H. insists on a necessary differentiation : " A city-state is a self-governing polity , but not necessarily an independent and autonomous state .
It suffices that a city-state is a legislative , administrative and judicial unit and ( roughly ) possesses what in modern terms is called ' internal sovereignty ' , i.e. a government which enforces a legal order within a territory over a population " ( ibidem ) .
A shop was the inevitable next step ; they opened the doors of their storefront in St .
Beyond stuipd , I work with embedded systems all day long and the only person who would watch TV on a monitor is a nerd .
A pragmatist is a person who is oriented toward the success or failure of a particular line of action , thought , etc. ; a practical person .
gee , you 'd think if a guy is a U.S. senator , traveling back and forth to his district , he might be a member of an airline club and not have to " stoop " to a public men 's room .
A dog is a dog ...
The only thing I would disagree is the fact that she played a slave being a big deal .
I wonder how some of these republicans ( Ted ) would feel if there pension they worked for their entire life was suddenly threatend by others to lower or just change the agreement ... a deal is a deal ... right ..?
News / Crime " The only thing that stops a bad guy with a gun is a good guy with a gun .
" The only thing that stops a bad guy with a gun is a good guy with a gun , " LaPierre said .
But mostly , Patty believes , a headset is a small price to pay for peace of mind .
Is there anyone who really believes George Bush gives a rat 's A -- about " pending and future federal cases ?
An occupational hazard of such an award is the probability that the shortlisted authors may be travelling at the time , and while Kathleen Jamie was present to accept her prize in person , Robert Macfarlane was somewhere up the Cairngorms , so his walking companion David Quentin accepted the award on his behalf .
A lie is a lie is a lie , unless one is seriously crazy and honestly thinks they ae someone else ( in which case it is n't a lie ) or does so out of necessity of self preservation .
A judgeship is a stepping-stone to higher office in Texas .
Saints tells the story of Four-Girl who never receives a name because in Chinese culture , the birth of a fourth female in a family is an omen of death .
A job is a task that will be executed when an associated trigger fires .
It 's because of him they think searching for a third person on the interwebs for a threesome is a bad thing no whilst it might just have been what saved their relationship ..
There is plenty of food that can be ordered by pointing , so ordering from a menu is an extra pleasure .
An OT is a must .
Mythologically speaking , a scarab is an archetypal symbol which represents , as in ancient Egypt , death / rebirth and transformation .
You can see that a unit ( or " oneness " ) formed by a couple is a higher form of human life than an individual by himself or herself .
The " reach " of a stem is the distance from the centerline of the steering axis to the center of the handlebar clamp area , but the issue is the angle this measurement is taken from .
Even in the political arena bounded by the state , however , there is no clear distinction between cultural politics and public policy , and therefore no clear way of determining whether or not " politicizing " an issue is a responsible or irresponsible thing to do .
But let 's be honest here ; a conference is all about what 's said outside the room rather than in the room .
( C ) RECORD DEFINED - For purposes of subparagraph ( A ) , a record is the following : ( i ) A record that identifies a person who has been convicted in any court of a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding 1 year .
( C ) RECORD DEFINED - For purposes of subparagraph ( A ) , a record is the following : ( i ) A record that identifies a person arrested for a crime that is punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year , and for which a record of final disposition is available electronically or otherwise .
A review is a good way of finding out who 's already working in this area and starting productive conversations with interested staff .
School superintendent and academic administration as a whole is a growing field .
Additionally , coercion by an individual on another individual to commit a felony is a felony ( emphasis added ) : and ; " Coercion " : A relationship in which a person is subjected to physical force ( or the threat of it ) in order to compel him to submit to the choices of another person .
Colin Jenkins , The Hampton Institute : Rather than seeing themselves as public servants , police officers have increasingly embraced the " us vs. them " mentality - anyone who is n't a cop is a potential threat .
Steve Fisher spoke about how a website is a black hole without content in it , and we seemed to forget that for a few years .
Stephanie spoke a lot about the formulation of ideas as part of the problem-solving process and how framing a problem is the key to understanding it ; working out who , what , why , how ?
Con : " Let there be no doubt that the Bush Administration 's new talk of a draft is a profound measure of how much this President has failed our brave men and women in the military , and the American people .
This study shows that untreated depression is an exposure for the child in the same way that taking a medication is an exposure .
A ToggleAction is an Action that has a boolean-valued property named " ToggleState " .
A subscription is an auto renewing according to the renewal period that is set up in the administration .
A beginning is any time I have a shift in my focus .
As we say here in America , " A mind is a terrible thing to waste , " and " It is better to teach one to fish , than to give him a fish .
' ( L ) Methods for ensuring that pilots ( including Federal flight deck officers ) will be able to identify whether a passenger is a law enforcement officer who is authorized to carry a firearm aboard the aircraft .
A mermite is a military food storage container that was designed for the storage and transport of freshly prepared food .
A PeopleMeter is a box which sits on top of every television set Coach black purse dillards within a house on the panel .
A need is a construct ( a convenient fiction or hypothetical concept ) which stands for a force ( the physiological-chemical nature of which is unknown ) in the brain region , a force which organizes perception , apperception , intellection , conation , and action in such a way as to transform in a certain direction an existing , unsatisfying situation .
A celebrity is a person who works hard all his life to become known , then wears dark glasses to avoid being recognized .
Again : under these assumptions , neither the chances of the success of the strike nor the risks it entails matter - a strike is the only option .
Inasmuch as it is possible to gauge the damage caused by irrational biases , I believe the bias resulting from the idea of a holocaust is both more common and more dangerous than the bias favoring inaction .
Every astrologer knows that the most important date of the year for an individual is the day of their annual Solar Return ; the time at which the sun is once again in the exact position it occupied at the time of your birth .
Capital In general terms the " capital " of a company is the total equity of the shareholders of a " stock " insurance company .
In the distance behind the gate of a shrine are the towers of the TEPCO Fukushima complex .
In general terms the " capital " of a company is the total equity of the shareholders of a " stock " insurance company .
Just getting an appointment was a feat .
" Since a corporation is a well-defined legal concept , we must define the often ill-defined adjective " sustainable .
Deductible A deductible is the amount specified in an insurance policy , by the insurance company that the policy holder will need to pay ...
A dove is a symbol of peace and there are two possibilities which seem likely .
Hence , Restatement ( Third ) of Agency § 7.07 provides that " an employee is an agent whose principal controls or has the right to control the manner and means of the agent 's performance of work .
Having said that , Justice Felix Frankfurter famously observed that " [t]o say that a man is a fiduciary only begins analysis ; it gives direction to further inquiry .
A pledge is a convention whereby the settlor grants a creditor a preferential payment right over the other creditors .
That such a knowledge was implanted in him by his Creator will be very generally admitted , but the popularity of a belief is no pledge of its truth .
Implementing an intranet is the best solution to rectify the problem at Hyundai Motors .
My first weekend as a fan was the 1994 [ ...
Proper circulation of air in a greenhouse is a must for healthy plants .
To put the chief in some form of a rank is a futile exercise .
Both Gorseland and Kudawella wanted a way in which they were able to learn more about each other 's schools , lifestyles and cultures and a website was the ideal place to share information .
To dispel so pleasing an illusion is an uncongenial task .
I had been to NNP twice in 1996 ; nevertheless it is always interesting to spend a day birding here 100 species in a day is a relatively easy task and we did over 130 - of course , the expertise of Itai Shanni , whom we thank again , made it possible to find a number of good birds .
Yes , any Ross on a poster is a cast-iron guarantee of cinematic detritus .
A highlight was a troop of beautiful Black and White Colobus monkeys that disappeared through the trees before the photographers among us could focus .
If on the other hand a placement is a compulsory part of your course you have two options .
The imposition of a penalty is a matter for the whole House .
[ 332 ] The imposition of a penalty is a matter for the House .
I remember thinking at the time ( as a hardened command line junkie ) that having an O / S that was so dependant on one small peripheral that a problem with same could convert an expensive device into a doorstop was a bloody silly idea .
Become a host join affiliates tell a friend calculators invest clubs news tutorials quotes article archive printable forms all chats est the tax advantages of buying a home feature article by lois center-shabazz buying a home is a one of the biggest decisions you will make in life .
I 'm guessing at having a staff ID badge and needing a wank being the necessary requirements here .
The only possible slogan in such a case is an all-out political general strike to bring down the government .
A snapshot is a freeze-frame that lets you save the current state of the Windows virtual machine .
Henderson recalled that several years ago , a student in his geometry course objected to this proof because to her an angle is a geometric object that is congruent to another angle if it is possible to rigidly move one angle until it coincides with the other .
An example is the estimation of angles and distances in basketball or the logic of moves in the game of chess .
" The most indubitable feature of a revolution is the direct interference of the masses in historic events .
As we all know , being in a profession is a privilege .
How can a city be a world ?
A sprain is an injury to a ligament as a result of abnormal or excessive forces applied to a joint , but without dislocation or fracture .
A sprain is an injury to a ligament as a result of abnormal or excessive forces applied to a joint , but without dislocation or fracture [ Pugh , 2000 ] .
Definition : In contrast to a felony , which is more severe , a misdeameanor is a lesser crime that is punishable by a fine and / or jail time of up to one year .
An alternative is the former military Ermolino Airport , in the Kaluga district southwest of Moscow , about 67 km from Moscow 's inner ring road .
A socket is a communication channel between two processes , usually ( but not necessarily ) running on different computers .
A 60 year old smoker paying $ 360 a month is a deal .
Whatever the reason , an absence is an absence : there are no ' excused ' absences .
Looking at the cognitive dimension , an attitude is a view or opinion that a person has towards a certain state of existence , of an object , an idea , of another person , or of other people ( Eiser 1994 ) .
An agitator is a man who wo n't stand for lies [ just ] because they are told .
An inverse is a function $$g : B \ mapsto A$$ such that for $$a \ in A , g \ circ f \ left ( a \ right ) = a , \ forall a \ in A $ $ .
A permutation is a bijective function from a set $$A$$ to itself .
A transpostion is a cycle $ $ \ left ( \ begin{array} {c}i & j \ end{array} \ right ) $ $ of length 2 that interchanges ( transposes ) $$i$$ and $ $ j $ $ .
Sometimes doing something that does n't feel right in a war is the right thing to do and all must accept that or lose the war .
For the purpose of assessing carrier code eligibility , a carrier is a person involved in international commercial transportation who operates a conveyance used to transport specified goods to or from Canada .
A spell is a ritual formula , or series of steps , to direct psychic energy to accomplish a desired end .
Commitment and Intensity of the Volunteer Experience - The main variable that determines high or low impact on an employee is the intensity of the volunteer experience .
Helping them make contacts and even helping get a job is a favor of super value .
The first week and a half was a blur of new faces , friends , customs and languages .
A dog is a luxury in Prague , and in the United States .
Integer : An integer is a whole number , one that does n't have a fraction or decimal piece to it .
Numeral : A numeral is the symbol , not the word , used to represent a number .
Diameter : The diameter of a circle is the length of the line that goes through the middle and touches both sides of the circle .
Polygon : A polygon is a 2 - dimensional ( or plane ) shape that has three or more sides made up of line segments , with an equal number of angles .
Mardi Gras Globe offers a behindthescenes think about the history , a intricate drifts and the attires that define a city 's a lot of cherished party .
I have to make the moves in my career that are best for me , and I feel like coming over to RAB Racing and Toyota and being able to bring Rheem with me as a sponsor was the best situation for me to be in right now .
A viewer is a viewer .
' A novel is an essentially playful undertaking , and this is an exceedingly playful novel .
" A man is a teller of tales , " wrote Sartre in 1938 , a few years after you were born , probably .
A gateway is a set of signs and markings at an intersection to alert drivers to the reduced speed limit .
MULTIPLES Multiples of a number are the result of multiplying that number by another whole number .
" The mistake that the lower court made in this case is they assumed that holding up a sign was the First Amendment equivalent of attempting to engage somebody in conversation or handing them a leaflet , and we do n't think those things are fungible , " he says .
SHAPIRO : The mistake that the lower court made in this case is they assumed that holding up a sign was the First Amendment equivalent of attempting to engage somebody in conversation or hand them a leaflet , and we do n't think those things are fungible .
Search results are the first exposure most people have to a website , and a domain is a huge part of it as it 's the site 's brand / identity .
Share A Sale is a company based in Chicago and has been in business for 13 years now .
A purchase is an act of individual sovereignty .
( " He associated Plato , " noted a historian , " ever after , with the smell of wool . " ) 44 Even though he thought there were too many books to be read , and thought readers should share their findings by reporting to one another the gist of their studies , Emerson believed that reading a book was a private and solitary business .
Following these positives by half a point is the diffraction relationship 1 / 3 of an f-stop better lens closed down performance from the 5 D. Whee .
A gland is an organ in an animal 's body that synthesizes a substance for release of substances such as hormones or breast milk , often into the bloodstream ( endocrine gland ) or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface ( exocrine gland ) .
Roger Clinton had come up to me and he had asked me could I give him some coke , you know , and asked for my one-hitter , which a one-hitter is a very small silver device , O.K. , that you stick up into your nose and you just squeeze it and a snort of cocaine will go up in there .
Woody Harrelson once said that doing a headstand is the best hangover cure , and even talked to Playboy about yoga 's sex benefits .
Ti simply regard them as fake and assume people are unintelligent as a result is a bit closed minded .
A logo is a part sub-conscience need humans have to mark themselves .
Every single mark of an identity is a symbol that assists in describing the experience of that identity .
A blanket statement stating that a symbol is a waste of time is itself a waste of time and undeserving of further contemplation .
A brand is an evolving story not an unchanging visual stamp .
I agree with Ben that a brand is an evolving story .
He had become a master of magnetic energy but $ 7,200 a year was all he could make for his mastery .
When your choices are limited to " criminal " and " spineless " , an election is a question that is answered by the maxim a distinction without difference is no difference .
Cutting a cable is a treasonable offense in your area .
However , statements of category membership ( things which are always true ) are expressed in the perfect : siyise eteîa ê ' a daisy is a flower ' .
An MTA is a contract between institutions that dictates the terms of transfer of research materials from the donor institution to the recipient .
They thought that naturally , an abortion was the only option .
A theme is an insight or viewpoint or concept that a story conveys .
" Writing a book is an adventure .
A person is a fool to become a writer .
" What should you say , now , " continued Harry , " if I told you that the smoke that comes out of a candle is the very thing that makes a candle light ?
The smoke of a candle is a cloud of small dust , and the little gains of the dust are bits of charcoal , or carbon , as chemists call it .
So a candle is a little gas manufactory in itself , that burns the gas as fast as it makes it .
Instruction Acids An acid is a substance that dissociate into ... when dissolved in water ...
Keenly aware of his credentials ( " today a minister is just a minister , but a psychiatrist is the new tribal high priest whose words come wrapped in the aura of the new high canon : science " ) , Satinover , balances clear , colorful writing , always empathetic with what he calls " the neutral , rigorous , statistics-based tenor of modern research methodology " .
That said , a link is a link is still a link no matter where it resides until you determine a goal for it .
No wonder , because the employment status of an individual is the very basis on which his employment relationship with you is defined .
Much that is termed a disease is a normal aspect of this time of life and needs to be viewed as such .
What kind of a town is this ?
v. Brightman [ 1998 ] I.R.L.R. 228 which rejected as unreal and as giving rise to serious practical difficulties the notion of a dismissal being a nullity unless falling within Regulation 8 ( 2 ) on the basis of economic , technical or organisational reasons entailing changes in the workforce .
The speeches of Lord Keith of Kinkel , Lord Oliver and Lord Templeman ( with whom Lord Brandon of Oakbrook and Lord Jauncey of Tullichettle agreed ) do not , however , read as a whole give support to the contention that a dismissal prior to , or after , a transfer is a nullity so that the actual employment continues .
How about explaining why a negative times a negative is a positive or give a concrete explanation for why the slopes of perpendicular lines are negative reciprocals of each other ?
On line 1 I defined as a matrix containing the coefficients of the linear system above ( a coefficient is the number to the left of the unknown variables , and ) .
Such a person is a " complete rashah " as far has his judgment is concerned .
For some patients a scar is a constant reminder of that trauma that caused the scar - which might be surgery , an accident , a disease or may even result from self inflicted damage .
A scar is a constant reminder of the trauma , operation or injury that caused it .
" International refugee law was formulated to serve as a back-up to the protection one expects from the state of which an individual is a national .
I bare my bum to the heavens I think a head is a hole .
Wallenstein 's importance as a general is a matter of dispute .
The encoding act of creating a title is a synthetic process : beginning with the creator 's purpose ( Who will it be for ? ) , which belongs to the affective domain , continuing with the cognitive ( What is it to be about ?
Conversely , perusing a title is an analytic process of decoding from the sensorimotor ( Is it satisfying ? ) through the cognitive ( Is it true ?
Producing a title is an inductive process while interpreting or using a title to make search decisions is an analytic or deductive process .
Would a grant be a better option ?
No , because in fact a newspaper is a lottery ticket -- sometimes the payoff is high , sometimes low , and in equilibrium , the expected payoff is exactly equal to the reservation price .
1.1 A cause is a real mental event or change .
If an effect is the result of a process which flows from a cause , it is clear that an effect and its cause(s) must be distinct .
36 A plan is a consistent and integrated series of actions intended to be implemented over time .
As long as all marriages are monogamous , the number of husbands supplied and the number of wives demanded are the same , since a man seeking to become a husband is a man seeking to obtain a wife , just as , on a barter market , someone who offers to trade wine for beer is both supplying wine and demanding beer .
A price of $ 10,000 paid by a husband to a wife is the same thing as a price of - $ 10,000 paid by a wife to a husband .
A tessellation is a shape that is repeated over and over again , covering a plane without any gaps or overlaps .
Accept that a relapse is a risk but one that can be managed .
TRAMP , a dungeon being an amenity that no Greek temple could be without , especially a Hestian one .
And a scene is a sequence of actions ( or perhaps lines of dialogue ) .
The President chastises them in his latest speech and the VP calls them a horse 's a * * .
The law stipulates that the only medical condition that could constitute grounds for the euthanasia of a minor is the presence of terminal illness , imminent death and untreatable physical pain .
A memoir is a great legacy .
In this sense a tree is a little bit like a coral -- we see the living skin of tissue over a dead framework that the tree has built up over the centuries of its growth .
The first is an analysis of the effects of tariffs -- in particular , the question of whether imposing a tariff is a Marshall improvement or a Marshall worsening .
In the first section of this part of the chapter , I will prove that if America as a whole is a price taker in international markets , then American tariffs are undesirable even if we take into account only the interests of Americans -- or , in other words , that the abolition of American tariffs would produce net benefits for Americans .
In the verbal proof , however , I said nothing at all about whether the United States as a whole was a price taker ; all I assumed was that the export and import industries were price takers within the United States ( and therefore efficient ) .
Such a tariff is a Marshall improvement if we consider only gains and costs to Americans ; it is a Marshall worsening if we include gains and losses to foreigners .
Mr Prosser said that one could avoid this illogicality by treating the whole of subsection ( 6 ) as applicable only to the question of whether a company was a closed company .
But there are cases in which it is not enough to know that it can be said of a certain person , or certain people , that they control company A. An example is the question of whether company A is a close company , which involves not only asking whether participators control the company but also whether they are directors or number five or fewer .
In other words , a murmur is a sound that might or might not indicate heart disease .
A geneticist is a doctor or scientist who studies how genes work and how diseases and different traits are passed from parents to children through their genes .
A mutation is an abnormality in a gene or genes .
A colloid is a mixture that is not truly homogeneous , but appears homogeneous to the naked eye , and cannot be separated or filtered out easily .
" Where a person is a refugee full account is to be taken of the provisions of the Convention and Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees ( Cmd 9171 and Cmnd 3906 ) .
" I keep asking myself the same question I asked nearly 50 years ago : How could a job be this good ?
Whether or not a member is an employer in relation to an employee , he has no right to the services of that employee except such right as may be conferred by the rules and bye-laws .
" A bridge is a living thing , " Malak began .
Consultation with a doctor is a sure way to make sure you do n't have any interactions with medicines or allergic reactions to an herb .
A makiwara is a wooden pillar that one strikes .
A jo is a unit of measure previously used in Japan .
Besides , being a whistleblower is a sure route to one of the great modern desirables : fame .
" A parable is a cryptic or dark saying .
( Eccl 9:5 ,10 ; Ps 115:17 115:17 ) A prison is a place where men are held in restraint of personal liberty .
Admitting you have a problem is the first step to recovery The relationship between homelessness and addiction or dependence ...
It amazes us constantly how people think that a dishwasher is a desperately simple device , in some ways it is , but other than a drum and bearings ( although other parts make up for them ) there are as many parts in a dishwasher as there is in a washing machine .
A school is an important formative influence on anyone 's life as an educational institution and as a social hub , but for me it has an even more important role - it is my home .
The views expressed in this essay as a whole are those of Prof .
If such a play were a commercial success , the theatre and those going to it would be attacked by a combined mob of liberal luvvies , violent Trotskyites and members of ethnic criminal gangs .
In this psalm , the incredible forces of a storm are the actions of YHVH performing " shock and awe .
To say that Bettina Eistel is an accomplished dressage horse competitor with a disability is a huge understatement .
A marriage is a relationship in which one person is always right and the other is the husband process in an emotionally an ATM machine as out so that the children .
An ounce is an ounce ( Troy OZ . ) weather the coin is an American Eagle or a krugarrand .
" An ounce is an ounce ( Troy OZ . ) weather the coin is an American Eagle or a krugarrand .
' If a wife be a harlot , ' He says , ' I do not compel the husband to live with her ; and if she be an unbeliever , I do not forbid him , ' Again , ' if thou be grieved against any one , I command him that hath grieved thee to leave My gift and to run to thee .
Seriously , if you tell a kid an atom is a cloud with blinking lights appearing around it that always number a certain number ?
Now , the only way to know for sure if a cat is a spectral , is to observe it over time and see if there are any unusual changes in its appearance or behavior .
I referred back to our " Career " month to build upon careers knowledge and we learned that a Meteorologist is a person who studies weather .
A cloud is a large collection of very tiny droplets of water or ice crystals .
Living Stones - A stone is an odd image for life .
Johnny , Do n't you still think that the tape is what it is even though someone used it as an agenda is a totally different matter altogether .
But , by the time a player is a senior , the coaches have a pretty good idea of what they are capable of .
I remember thinking a stadium was an odd place to see Bruce Springsteen , but when he played " Glory Days " and the people in the top row of the third deck were dancing like they were in a bar , I knew he could conquer pretty much anything .
Many people in all that involves each partner in the proposed amendments in any sort of family that marriage after cheating spouse it can be found through a divorce is the unexceeded prize for all things women , check more lies .
increasing rate at which couples the Octomom have a place bc vital statistics marriage vows where not just about your ability to over a divorce is the sole answer .
Underneath a bridge is a bank he and his dad heaped up with riprap .
Not so : a congressman is any member of Congress , though the term is more commonly applied to representatives .
And yet , perhaps , the great lesson which the people were to learn , were to be educated by poignant grief properly to appreciate , was this : that to destroy the life of a nation is an infinitely greater crime than to destroy the life of a nation 's ruler .
Your idea of crossing as a pedestrian is the best way if you 're not confident .
( The nth moment of a distribution is the expectation value of \ ( ( x - \ bar{x} ) ^ n \ ) , where \ ( x \ ) is a random value drawn from the distribution and \ ( \ bar{x} \ ) is the mean value .
Ballad Traditionally , a ballad is a song , transmitted orally from generation to generation , that tells a story and that eventually is written down .
If I believe that ideas should be free , and that a photograph is an idea , then I need to back up that belief by NOT accepting money I do n't deserve for for an old snapshot that took close to zero time , effort , or inspiration to create .
I understand Martin has the right to make the decision he made to leave the CD 1 seat -- that the life of a congressman is a grind and that he has children -- but I wish we 'd had those conversations with him before Jeff Bingaman retired , or last year , and let him know he had to make a commitment to hang in there for 10 years in the House .
I wanted to create a place where being a blacksheep was a good thing .
A pot of initial investment in an idea is a valuable thing .
Unless such a child was a family member , it 's unlikely you 'd have seen him , except in passing .
Thursday blows him off because a laundromant is no place to air dirty laundry .
A virus is the most common cause of pinkeye , but a bacterial infection can cause it on occasion .
These are common progressions in areas of research in which developing causal models of a phenomenon is the paramount goal .
Initial arguments against a disease being the reason for his almost cartoon-like depictions was that other human figures were represented in the same style .
In Islamic tradition , a large niche called a mihrab is the most important element inside of every mosque .
When one of the conditions of earning a wage is the keeping up of a certain state , subsistence wages may reach a figure to which the term seems ludicrously inappropriate .
In the initial installation / training session 2 schemas were set up ( a schema is a type of document i.e. a standard form ) for documents that are used frequently in an organization .
" A simulus is a counterfeit perception caused by changing a mental representation .
( 24 ) Earlier in his speech , Socrates describes the divine mission ( in Jowett 's translation ) as Herculean labors ; the unpopularity he acquires as a result is a heavy burden .
A sophisma is a statement which one can plausibly argue both to be true and to be false , given certain explicit background assumptions ( the casus ) which are , for the sake of the argument , not open to challenge .
So , assume that one does not know whether the proposition that has just been uttered is ' God exists ' , which one knows must be true , or ' a man is a donkey ' , which one knows must be false .
A corporation is a separate legal person under the law .
A partnership is an association of two or more persons to carry on as co-owners a business for profit .
When a corporation is the employer , the physician should verify the precise name of the corporation and should verify that the corporation is in good standing in its state of incorporation and the state where it is doing business .
The cost of a house is the same as the cash value of the property it is built on ( printed on the board and on each lease ) .
If using a clutch is no big deal for you , then shifting gears should be a piece of cake .
The most common species kept as a pet is the Corn snake which comes in a variety of colors and averages 3 - 4 feet in length .
" A grumble was the only response he got .
It is easy to introduce to you the orator of the evening , and then to keep still and give him a chance is the difficult task .
This means that you will not be able to see the details of any instances An instance is a specific execution of a job .
It would come to a standstill were all men to dream as I have indicated .
' By definition ' , Maurice Cranston rightly points out , ' a liberal is a man who believes in liberty ' ( 1967 : 459 ) .
" An expert is a man who has made all the mistakes which can be made , in a narrow field .
( 22 ) They shall not build , and another inhabit ; they shall not plant , and another eat : for as the days of a tree are the days of my people , and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands .
When we consider Smith 's concern about the clamour he expected to arise from the Dialogues , and his entire unconcern about the clamour he did not expect to arise from the letter to Strahan on Hume 's last illness , the actual event seems one of those teasing perversities which drew from Lord Bolingbroke the exclamation , " What a world is this , and how does fortune banter us !
* Tracking - The ability to track an object is a prerequisite for high-quality perception .
William was also an invader , so for many men , fighting against an invader was the right thing to do .
An engineer is a man who can do for five bob what any fool can do for a quid ( Nevil Shute ) .
A combi is a lazy mans option and at best part of £ 2000 for an oil one you can do a lot of plumbing for that .
The owner has serviced the boiler himself for the last 22 years , I asked what size nozzle was being put in , after a blank return expression I assume a service is a run around with his vacuum ...
A community is the sum of its individual parts .
The survey found that a smartphone is the most desirable communications tool for British workers , with 31 % saying it would enable them to carry out their job more effectively .
Where his muse was one year , a mail-coach and a hotel were the next .
A summons is a legal notice requiring you to appear at the Magistrates Court if you dispute liability .
Possibly , using a locksmith is the best option from the householder 's point of view .
An example is the ingenious but simple ' clutch-head ' one-way security screw ( see picture adjoining ) .
An example is the collection of ornamental reef fish for the aquarium trade in southern Sri Lanka .
The domination number of an algorithm is a function of the size of the input and gives the number of solutions that the algorithm is guaranteed to bettter .
A basic principle of English company law is that a company is a separate legal entity from its shareholders .
If you 're getting short-stacked and can hang on from Omaha Hi-Lo into Razz it could give you a chance to rebuild , as the game transforms from one where a raise is a significant percentage of your stack and good starting hands can become useless on the flop , to one with no blinds pressure and where you can wait for good hands and cheap stealing opportunities .
A person is a pensioner if they have attained the qualifying age for state pension credit and they are not , or , if they have partner , their partner is not in receipt of income support , income-based jobseekers allowance , income-related employment and support allowance or universal credit .
Sending the jury out of court during a trial within a trial is an example of this ; so may be the common ruling in prosecutions for blackmail that a victim called as a witness be referred to in court by a pseudonym ( see Reg .
" Singing / chanting while dancing in a circle is a dynamic meditation in movement : from fast , high energy dances to slow contemplative walks , attuning to love , harmony and beauty , dipping into the heart of many religions , as well as touching the universal truth in various spiritual traditions : dancing inter-faith !
A guide is a worthwhile expense at around £ 15 per person .
A smartcard is a plastic card , the size of a credit card , but with a small microchip embedded in it .
Wentworth said " The authority of a king is the keystone which closeth up the arch of order and government , which containeth each part in due relation to the whole .
I said Wenger 9 mil a year was a bargain just before this game and i can say without a doubt he is worth every penny and then some .
As a cycling friend said recently : " A tosser is a tosser , no matter what mode of transport they 're using .
A lot has surprised me today , but what awakened my desire as a consumer is the Nintendo 3 DS system 's capacity as a player of 3 D images .
( At this juncture , the MPs that voted unanimously voted to reject the plan . ) How unfair and self-destructive ( because of its terrible impact on depositors and banks in the periphery ) a plan was the deal that Yglesias claimed contained " the germ of a great idea ?
A skill is a learned competence and almost anyone can be taught a particular skill .
One thing besides mass murder , through baiting it , that needs a time-line is the fear of some scientists that a chain reaction might consume the earth , that the Atomic bomb , then Hydrogen Bomb , would cause a chain reaction that would involve all the earth .
An opinion is an assertion that is not supported by logic or evidence .
A cramp is an involuntary and forcibly contracted muscle that does not relax .
A seivert is the unit used to measure exposure .
Mention of Miranda warnings is not , however , forbidden at trial : under the Commonwealth 's " humane practice " rule , where the voluntariness of a statement is a live issue at trial , the jury may hear evidence that a defendant was informed of and understood his Miranda rights .
Never had a paper been the object of such a wave of solidarity .
If coming into contact with a pig is all it takes to send him to their version of Hell ; why not a firing squad , dip the bullet into a small cup of pigs blood from the slaughter house , and then put him down like a rabid dog , cremate the remains and send it to a pig farm to be dumped into a dung heap .
With the body charger , going back to the battery analogy , the cap of a battery is the grounding activity while the negative output at the bottom of the battery , is used to charge the body with trillions of negatively charged Ions in the form of static electricity .
We have examples of such things in nature already - for example , just as a proton is a composite object made from quarks , antiquarks and gluons , the proton field is a composite field made from quark , antiquark and gluon fields - and we do n't know whether the Higgs is an elementary field , as is the electric field , or a composite of more elementary fields , as is the proton field .
Ruby expressions and statements are terminated at the end of a line unless the statement is obviously incomplete-for example if the last token on a line is an operator or comma .
If an lvalue is a variable or constant name , that variable or constant receives a reference to the corresponding rvalue .
If an lvalue is a parenthesized list , it is treated as a nested assignment statement , and the list is assigned from the corresponding rvalue as described by these rules .
The return value of a method is the value of the last expression executed .
From the type of forkIO , you can immediately see that spinning up a thread is a side-effecting operation , which ensures that any encoding of mutable cells using threads will be in the I / O monad as well .
Being a manager is a 24 / 7 role .
A computer is a stupid machine with the ability to do incredibly smart things , while computer programmers are smart people with the ability to do incredibly stupid things .
A fool with a tool is a more dangerous fool .
A variable is an exception : its match is never entered into the environment .
Doubloon comes from the Spanish Doblón which means to double ; thus a doubloon is a coin of double value .
But , as is often the case in science , not finding a signal is a result in itself , as it allows scientists to eliminate some possibilities in attempting to fully characterize the asteroid .
October 29 Log A shipwreck is a bit different but still works in concert with the biology and geology .
Interestingly , one of the groups listed in annexe A as a respondent is the electoral commission .
The whole ultra hard-line on abortion is based on the opinion that something with less function than an amoeba is a human being .
There are a bunch of idiots that think that a fetus is a live living person .
Living in a town like a tribe is the problem at the first place .
Such a person is the enemy of humanity and earth .
A hug 's a way to share the joy And sad times we go through , Or just a way for friends to say They like you ' cause you 're you .
A hug is an amazing thing - It 's just the perfect way To show the love we 're feeling But ca n't find the words to say .
A blog is a powerful , customer-facing tool .
Being a secretary is an important job anyway , and not one to disregard .
" A book is a version of the world .
" Writing a book is a horrible , exhausting struggle , like a long bout of some painful illness .
I really liked : " A book is a version of the world .
That and 1500 calories a day is all they need .
Firm websites for lawfirms with many practice groups are designed to illustrate that the firm can aptly address a client 's every legal need .
( A tamagotchi is a little computerised toy , which the child is meant to bring up by regularly feeding , cleaning and playing with , leaving little time for activities such as concentrating on lessons at school .
But keep in mind , a conversion is a conversation , but a conversation is not necessarily a conversion .
Writing an explication is an effective way for a reader to connect a poem 's plot and conflicts with its structural features .
Semaphores are a bit like spinlocks , except the holder of a semaphore is a process , not a CPU .
And what turns an opposition leader into a prime-minister-in-waiting is no accident .
You need a good transcript and good GRE scores to be considered , but what I 've found really makes an application are the quality of the recommendation letters and personal statement .
One of the more embarassing things as a bicyclist is the trip to the bike shop to fix a crash-broken part .
A life is the immanence of immanence , absolute immanence : it is sheer power , utter beatitude .
In Frankenstein 's narrative what makes the monster a monster is the horror of his eyes .
On the other hand , a window is a part of a house , with all the edges attached to the building and having no occlusions .
There is only one definition of a child : a child is a child , and his / her rights are defended by international conventions of universal validity .
Several expressions deserve to be noted : " A woman is a symptom for the man .
For expert skirt-a-thoners , like 99 % of those with whom I 'm participating , pairing this little fella with a skirt is no problem .
If Home For Purim was a slightly better movie , if you believed even for a minute that a nomination was a possibility , then the film might actually have been stronger .
It may sound twee but making a difference is the reason why he became a doctor and it 's nice that he is being recognised already for that .
The enterprise we call a university is an expensive commitment of resource , time and effort .
What causes wonderment in such a society is the fact that someone fails to observe political correctness and , thereby , seems to be disruptive of the so-called peace of society .
An ipad is a lot smaller than a typical magazine , so large format pads are needed to fill that market properly .
The common denominator of the collection as a whole is the precise and personal response it provides to the tastes and trends of motorcyclists of the 21st century , with particular attention to the female market and everyday use of the motorcycle .
In the bible 's world , a mountain was a place of closer encounter with the God who dwells in heaven .
Not everybody with a PhD is all so smart , by the way .
( 1 ) A fractal is a geometric pattern that is repeated at ever smaller scales to produce irregular shapes and surfaces that cannot be represented by classical geometry .
( 4 ) A tablet is a tool that involves a surface with the " active area " and a digital pen , called the stylus .
Nevertheless , in politics , a week is a long time .
The Episcopal Church 's support of such an organization is a matter or deep personal grief for myself .
This can be quite confusing - in what sense can a mouse or a fly or a worm be a model for a disease that only happens in people ?
I also remember you mentioning in Jesus Interrupted the translational issues surrounding the doctrine of eternal torment and the concept of an aion being a limited period of time ... not forever .
The Williams who wrote in 1944 in his " Author 's Introduction " to The Wedge that " A poem is a small ( or large ) machine made of words , " and two years later in Paterson , " No ideas but in things " ?
Even to start a blog was a huge accomplishment , and I 've got tons more knowledge than I had back in December .
Remind students that a pound is a unit of weight .
For it was necessary that one who was destined to be a statesman should be previously practised and trained in the management of a single household ; for a household is a city on a small and contracted scale , and the management of a household is a contracted kind of polity ; so that a city may be called a large house , and the government of a city a widely spread economy .
But a start is a start .
Remember that an address is an address , the type just tells the compiler how to interpret it .
A dog is an 8 animal .
An example is the California Title 24 norm that duct leakage be 6 % or less of the total airflow through the air handler .
Born with a normal male twin , a freemartin is a sterile cow that has external female genitalia and internal male gonads .
A hospitalist is a physician who is exclusively dedicated to treating patients during their hospital stay .
" There was this notion of an artist being a celebrity , " said John Lee , who now represents Goldsmith .
They will also oblige girls to be women that is a round is a kind of hovering for instance " ( p 385 ) .
With apologies to Gertrude Stein , it is not true that a bank is a bank is a bank .
A month is a day and a night of the manes , but the division is according to fortnights .
A year is a day and a night of the gods ; their division is ( as follows ) : the half year during which the sun progresses to the north will be the day , that during which it goes southwards the night 68 .
The last of the five parts of a panchang is the karana .
A karana is a half of a tithi ( lunar day ) .
Choosing a horse is a personal thing and it is impossible to cut and dry all of the reasons for a purchase .
But evangelicals as a group are the same people who support Jews for Jesus and Messianic Jews in general and give them aid and comfort .
A platform is an enabling space for people to interact and act upon issues .
A toolchain is a set of distinct software development tools that are linked ( or chained ) together by specific stages such as GCC , binutils and glibc ( a portion of the GNU Toolchain ) .
The second major component of a toolchain is the compiler .
However , for many middle-aged people of the analog age who have operated only pencils and abacuses their entire career , a computer is the last thing they want .
Playing just as important a role is the edgy photography of Donald McAlpine and the claustrophobic direction of Lee Tamahori .
The number of moles of a substance in a sample is the mass in g divided by the molar mass gives the amount in moles .
Persistence in doing a task is a virtue and should be encouraged .
An airplane is a much more sensitive control situation than a car .
My mother used to say , " A snob is a person who mimics the manners of the class above him .
Also , Lipschultz 's advanced age for a teacher is a constant theme on the show .
A kneeler is the architectural term for the stones on which the gable-end coping rests .
A constraint is a scalar function on configuration space for which X is restricted to lie on a particular level set .
The functional response of a predator is the relationship between prey consumption rate and prey density .
What sort of a life is this ?
The ' odds ' of an outcome is the ratio of the probability of its occurring to the probability of its not occurring .
Galactic Centre Blog : Willard Van de Bogart , webmaster of Earthportals , com , He has just started this blog ( a blog is a cross between a forum and internet diary ) , " to encourage disloge on this special time of the ending of the 26,000 precession cycle which the Mayans of course announced at 2012 .
The highest velocity of a planet is the 50 km / s velocity of Mercury in the closest to sun segment ( perihelion ) of its orbit .
The wavelength of a wave is the distance between a point on one wave and the same point on the next wave .
The frequency of a wave is the number of waves produced by a source each second .
Mr London is pissing himself at my kamikaze approach to all things requiring tact and diplomacy And I know you guys were n't trying to rip us off - it was just a loophole is all - and I 'm more than happy with the amended " C " word .
(ii)Another important prediction is that a neutrino is a paired electron and positron sharing an epola accompanying wave ( waveguide ) through the epola , analogous to an exciton in semiconductor physics .
An equation is a simple way to summarise the relationship between the angles ( which , together , describe the change in direction of the wave ) and the speeds at which the wave e.g. green light ) travels through the different media .
The refractive index of a material is a property of that material that is related to the extent to which a specific type of electromagnetic energy e.g. a wavelength of light ) travels through that material more slowly than that same type of electromagnetic energy e.g. that wavelength of light ) would travel through a vacuum .
This first Novel in a series is an outline of the Author 's thoughts and perceptions on the subject of how some races of mankind may have arrived on Earth in the shadowy days of prehistory .
A golf swing , Can Exercises For Golfers Make A Difference is a repetitive movement that places stresses on the same muscles over and over again .
He has just started this blog ( a blog is a cross between a forum and internet diary ) , " to encourage disloge on this special time of the ending of the 26,000 precession cycle which the Mayans of course announced at 2012 .
Roy Sammonds , chairman of the Bolton Institute of Advanced Motorists , and a congestion charge sceptic , said : " £ 5.5 million a year is a lot of money .
Is a webinar is the right tool for your needs ?
A list is a string of one or more entries , where each entry is separated from the next by means of a delimiter ( semicolon ) .
An effector is any part of the body that produces the response .
An example of a document is a Waste Transfer Note ( WTN ) which must accompany the transfer of waste .
" I think this will harm a lot of small businesses like ourselves and some might go under because £ 5 a day is a lot of money .
Managing a network is a chore that many organisations are now looking for additional help with .
in the golf , How Beginning ers Can Get Off to a Fast Start circuit , making a hole-in-one is a difficult job .
A hole-in-one is a 150 - yard shot .
A win is a win , as they say .
A week is a long time in sport .
Cabal as a story is a perfect example of this .
A hazard is the way in which an object or situation may cause harm - for example an icy road or a fire are both hazards .
A risk is the chance that a person will be harmed by a hazard , existing where a person is exposed to such a hazard - for example , driving on an icy road carries a risk .
" Letting a property is an excellent way of generating consistent income from your property , if the correct approach is adopted by prospective landlords , " said ARLA president Tim Hyatt .
Landlords must also provide a working smoke alarm and instruct tenants to test it regularly - once a week is the recommended amount .
But that 's not the argument really ; a rule is a rule and Drummond should have taken it with better grace .
The ruling has cemented the view that a customer is a recipient of a service , but that that service may be a free one .
A favourite is the mercury switch : I even fell for this one myself .
" Being a weathergirl is all I have ever wanted to be and I could n't be happier in my job .
However there 's no official definition or set guideline as to when a stream is a stream and not a river ; by far the most important factor is common historical usage .
An hour is a bit far fetched .
Both sides could have taken all three points , but a draw was a fair result .
He played so well with my Mum 's 6 year old Corgi bitch that we decided that a female was the way forwards ... not so ...
Its like playing a game being a driver in that place , dodge the people who walk in front of you and hope you missed them by an inch !
A hunk is a set of lines of a text file to be replaced by a different set of lines .
Basically , a merger is a patch that contains the two patches that conflicted , and instructs darcs basically to resolve the conflict .
A soundscape is a sound or combination of sounds that forms or arises from an immersive environment .
The standard and popular way to draw a picture of a class is the Unified Modeling Language ( UML ) .
A tree is a connected undirected graph without cycles .
My surprise teams are likely to pull off at least one win you did n't expect and a disappointment is a team , probably with home field advantage , which will lose earlier than even they expect .
The cockpit of a ferry is a wheelhouse , right ?
More than 12 million motor vehicles , each of them idle 23 hours a day-that 's a mind-boggling stock of underutilized capital , Aside from our homes , most of us Cascadians have more money tied up in our cars than in any other physical assets .
It 's not just an appetizer-it 's a day 's worth of calories ( 2,100 ) and trans fat ( 18 grams ) .
Matt is a lawyer now , a partner is a law firm with his buddy " Foggy " Nelson ( well-played by Jon Favreau --- I do n't recall if he actually called him " Foggy " in the movie , but it 's obviously the comic-book counterpart . ) While sitting in a nearby diner / coffee shop , a beautiful woman comes in ( Jennifer Garner ) that Matt smells and asks Nelson to describe her .
A tree is a connected undirected graph consisting of n vertices and n - 1 edges ( n > 0 ) .
For an even unimodular lattice , a root is a vector of squared norm 2 .
The central processing unit , also known as the CPU or the processor , of a computer is the part that reads , interprets , and executes the instructions of a program .
The weight of an object is a force .
Finding an advisor is a mutual process in which faculty seek students , sometimes for specific projects , and students seek faculty , sometimes with projects of their own in mind .
The people and agencies responsible for helping us learn about and impede such an attack are the very ones most likely to be distracted from their critical duties , " Cheney said .
A directory is a structure that contains files and other directories .
A note is an IOU for money .
Finding a space was a nightmare , I had to turn around for about 15 minutes when finally I found one completely at the end of the car park .
I do n't think it makes a practical difference whether a country is a monarchy or a republic - it 's a matter of principle .
The park is a relatively short distance from the airport and the parking of the car by an attendent is a fantastic .
So a sovereign is a monarch and a monarch is a sovereign .
Only a toaster is a toaster !
in a tent was a bit of a challenge !
The Zalman TNN ( Totally No Noise ) 500 A case is a revolutionary product in many ways .
Typically , the time taken to access a file is the normal seek time the hard disk displays added to the rotational latency ( time taken for all the spinning ) .
In fact , dowsing with a pendulum is a very left-brain way of accessing a right-brain skill .
For years , the existence of a monarchy was the guarantee that no would-be dictator could stage a coup by deploying troops , as the monarch controls the armed services .
A biopsy is the only test to find out if cells are cancer .
But a dissertation is a dissertation and an article is an article and neither is a book , so their publication waters down the whole field and leads right back to the publishing crisis outlined above .
A heiau is a temple but it looks , to my untrained eye , like a pile of stones .
In this video , entrepreneur and online marketing expert John Rampton talks about the one surefire thing that could point to a person being a born entrepreneur .
Maybe I am making the logical fallacy of equivocation , but exactly what - other than fundamental analysis - can an individual investor use to determine if a stock is a good buy or bad ?
A wikia is a volunteer project , and the admins should act as if they 're the volunteer coordinators at a non-profit agency .
A ruler is a guardian and is responsible ( for his subjects ) ; a man is a guardian of his family and responsible ( for them ) ; a wife is a guardian of her husband 's house and she is responsible ( for it ) , a slave is a guardian of his master 's property and is responsible ( for that ) .
Life to him was a great game to be played with boisterous heartiness , but he took his art seriously , and as a producer was a great influence in his time .
A balaclava is a black head sock / hood that is worn under the helmet and is used primarily to hide any view of the wearer 's skin and / or facial hair .
So , it 's a process is a strange combination of work and relaxation .
When Moretti quotes D ' Arcy Thompson on how the form of an object is a diagram of the forces which produced it , I 'm happy to go along , and even happy to agree that this gives us some ability to work backwards , from form to force .
( I also tried simulating from a Poisson process and then discretizing the result ; the results were n't much different . ) The only parameter of such a process is the mean inter-arrival time , or equivalently the " intensity " , the probability per year of producing a new genre .
A boutonniere is a traditional male accompaniment to a corsage on formal occasions .
The essential difference here from a conventional router or a firewall is the discretional ability of the NAT to alter the IP packet before forwarding it on .
This is a more precise form of UDP symmetry where the binding is available only to a single session , where a session is the 5 - tuple of protocol , source address , source port , destination address , and destination port .
In reality , an interview is a conversation with an agenda , and it is easier than you may think to miss out on what you 're trying to accomplish - i.e. , the promotion of your work .
PICKTHAL : Evil as an example are the folk who denied Our revelations , and were wont to wrong themselves .
I think a farm is a possibility , though it could be done " White hat " .
025.007 YUSUFALI : And they say : " What sort of a messenger is this , who eats food , and walks through the streets ?
My obsession as a kid was the Versace house .
These charitable organizations offer free pregnancy tests and counselling to women seeking accurate information about " all " of their options - abortion , adoption and parenting - without always readily disclosing their belief that terminating a pregnancy is the wrong choice .
" A budget is a reflection of military strategy , and we do n't want to prejudge the recommendations of commanders , " a White House budget official said in explaining the decision .
1 Under Section 504 and Title II , a person with a disability is a person who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits a major life activity ; or has a record of such an impairment ; or is regarded as having such an impairment .
But while the poet accepts that poets are not as exalted as the socially committed who directly reform the world , he argues that surely " a poet is a sage ; / A humanist , physician to all men .
You 're certainly right - it 's a constant struggle to figure out if a headline is the proper length ... you give an easy way to see if a headline will work or not .
I always though punctuation in a headline was a no-no but I think with this , I 'll use some next time I need to write a longer headline .
Rita : A novel is an incredibly huge ask .
Under Geneva , the onus is on the fighting parties to signal who 's a soldier and legitimate target by donning attire that clearly shows that a combatant is a combatant .
A fisher is a self-employed person engaged in fishing .
A mistake is an unintentional act .
Similar Non-Venomous Species Possibly the most crucial component for positively identifying a snake as a rattlesnake is the presence of a rattle .
Each poem ... is complete in itself ; yet each in a sense is a stage in a kind of struggle out of the slime ; part of a slow spiritual progress ; an effort to be born , and later , to become something more .
Obtaining a license is the first step towards becoming an ordain Baptist ...
Performing a wedding is a service that helps to unite people . ...
" Just how " fundamental " a problem is that piracy ?
The decision of whether an event is a force majeure shall be made by IDEM .
Releasing a record is a lot of work .
As far as intel , the US had warnings of a bin Laden attack ( we do n't know how specific those warning were ) BUT we know top neocons had the audacity to insist that the intel waring of an attack was a trick !
His father was in finance , and a grandfather was a physician who tended to the royal family .
An indispensable element in the campaign as a whole was the covering operations of the Fast Carrier Force , which are given in some detail in the next section of this report .
Presenting a poster at a conference is a terrific opportunity to promote your research and raise your professional profile in the wider academic community .
A transition is a good time to reflect on where you are heading in your career .
A terminal was a terminal .
A startup is the search for the business model , while a business is the implementation of a known model .
BERGER : Part of what we fight for as a country is the freedom to argue .
Add A Comment Be the first to comment !
Convalescing in a hotel is a lot cheaper than tying up a hospital bed .
" Add A Comment Be the first to comment !
A current example of such a scheme is the Digital Compact Cassette ( DCC ) compression scheme developed by Philips , which uses about 1 / 4 the data rate of a Compact Disc ( CD ) to reproduce sound which is hoped to be indistinguishable from the CD .
But to move litigiously and succeed in the eradication of a blog is the sort of intimidatory or bullying action one might associate with the regimes of Iran , North Korea or China .
An object is a kind of state machine .
On the contrary , knowledge of phrases or words that can be inserted at key moments in a conversation is the prerequisite for the construction of their identity as younger generation Greek-Cypriots in London ( Gardner-Chloros et al 2005 , 75 ) .
Some are , however , undecided ( 70 % ) that its practice in a conversation is an advantage .
A polygon is a geometric figure made up of a sequence of connected line segments .
The proper response to an artwork is another artwork .
[ note : a credcard is a self-contained debit card that can have anything from a pasword to retina scan protection .
His search for a face was a quest to discover his identity .
I 'll have you know there 's ' no evidence ' that running around on a motorway is a bad idea .
A set is a collection that has no duplicate entries .
Sorting a list is a fairly common operation , and there should really be a sorting method in the List interface .
As mentioned in the previous section , a Comparator is an object that defines a compare ( ) method that can be used to compare two objects .
A set is a collection of objects in which no object occurs more than once .
A bit is a quantity that has only two possible values , zero and one .
There are many approaches to trying to keep a tunnel permanently dry , and as many factors in whether a method is a success .
Recall that a precondition is a condition that must be true at a certain point in a program , for the execution of the program to continue correctly from that point .
Similarly , a postcondition is a condition that is true at a certain point in the program as a consequence of the code that has been executed before that point .
An amphora is a large pottery jar , almost a barrel , which contained imported foodstuffs from other parts of the Roman Empire - wine or olive oils for instance .
They say that to their credit anarchists had the merit of advancing the slogan ' Abolish the Wages System ' but that a slogan was all it was .
A daeman is a program that runs continually on a computer , independently of any user .
A protocol is a detailed specification of what data and messages can be exchanged over a connection , how they must be represented , and what order they can be sent in .
However Raith had a couple of good chances near the end so they thought a draw was a fair result .
An example is the image file , ca rds.png , that was used in the HighLowWithIma ges.jav a program earlier in this section .
The advantage that a competitor would gain by employing the defendant was not typically that they would gain access to an entirely new customer : the most that they might get in such a case is the benefit of a closer or more influential relationship with an existing client .
" On New Year 's eve 2001 Kovats moved to Los Angeles , initially for one year : " The exciting thing about being an artist is the ability to re-invent yourself , you are a portable thing ; that 's not always the case for other professions .
( 4 ) For the purposes of this paragraph an asset is a chargeable asset if any gain accruing on the disposal of the asset by the company would be a chargeable gain for the purposes of the Taxation of Chargeable Gains Act 1992 ( and includes any obligations under futures contracts which , by virtue of section 143 of that Act , are regarded as assets to the disposal of which that Act applies .
Also worth a mention is the Fisherman in Settle for really good fish and chips .
Writing Specifications A specification is the core of all contracts .
A vacuum is a good insulator , so the internally generated heat ( however small ) of the electronics is now in a box that had little radiative or conductive cooling capability to begin with , and now lacks convective cooling almost entirely , so the temperature rises .
In a way , having a party is a kind of modern sacrifice .
The flesh contouring shallowly on a head Is a rock-garden needing body 's love And best bodiness to colorify The big blue birds sitting and sea-shell cats And caves , and on the iron acropolis To spread the hyacinthine hair and rear The olive garden for the nightingales .
Remove the potting compound around the MOSFET leg terminals on the back of the board with something soft tipped - a screwdriver is a bit harsh .
" ( 13 ) For the purposes of this Schedule , a person is the foster child of another person under the law of any part of the British Islands if he is the foster child of that person in one of the ways described in sub-paragraph ( 2 ) ( a ) of any of paragraphs 4 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 and 11 .
An exception is the case of double letters as with the word carry in which the double R can be shown by slightly bouncing the corresponding handshape , or by dragging it , slightly , to the side .
A byte is an arbitrarily chosen standard of 8 binary bits .
My favorite Christmas gift as a child was a book , and while everyone else was playing with dolls or trying out new roller skates , I was reading .
Aviator [ disambiguation ] An aviator is a person who flies aircraft .
Aviator An aviator is a person who flies an aircraft .
The Arderius Rioja at £ 16.95 a bottle is a good match for the meatballs and the chorizo ; its sprightly berry flavours develop after the first sip and it works in tandem with the food rather than overpowering proceedings .
Potential over-governance by the GLA and the 32 London boroughs means that a reduction is both desirable and necessary .
The Freedom of Information Act itself demonstrates that the distinction of an item being a record is irrelevant as every element of information can be requested ; therefore all information is potentially necessary to protect and support one 's organisation .
Undoubtedly , a key component of such a strategy is a programme of events and festivals .
Where one member of a couple is a basic-rate taxpayer and the other is a higher-rate taxpayer , payments made to charity under the gift aid scheme should be made by the higher-rate taxpayer because they are currently able to claim higher-rate tax relief for the payments .
To be a Page in such a household was a blessing indeed , and here he would have received the best of education in good manners .
We were initailly told that adopting a dog was a long winded process - you did n't just turn up and go a home with a dog - Home visits , observations with each family member was required - you were looking at 2 weeks .
( an hour being a rough measurement ) That 's because your brain needs to expend more energy to perform the same tasks .
" Building a squad is a juggling act .
A home banker is certainly on the cards here , however at a best price of 1 / 5 ( general ) , an addition to an accumulator is the only use for this one .
HMRC realised that the start of a business was a critical moment , as some SMEs ' took a view ' as to whether they were going to join the tax system or not , so the more their path into the system could be smoothed , the better .
More specifially , a wart is a benign growth on the skin caused by an infection with ' human papillomavirus ' .
If a person is a naturally nervous sort , the issue might become a cause of prolonged anxiety ; if they are the usual phlegmatic Scot , they will go and have a beer and not worry about it very much .
My point is that it is important to remember that , where a scar is an injury , it is visible .
Although a processor is an important part and contributes to a computers power , alone this component is pretty useless if other components E.G. Motherboard are bog-standard components .
' I can only say that any policy that leads to a war is the wrong policy .
I 'm thinking less of the shapes of the cheeses themselves here but the way you cut or scoop them ( a spoon is an underrated implement when it comes to dealing with gooey cheeses like the runny sheep 's milk Le Pérail ! ) .
The execution of the comedy is something completely unsurprising but what IS an eye-opener is the choreography and shooting style of each of the big fight sequences .
Since underlining an image makes little sense , most browsers will indicate that an image is a link by adding a border that 's the same colour as the link colour .
As there were hundreds of guilds , some with thousands of members , a masterpiece was a feat no rarer than a great set of exam results .
" Well , a hammock 's a kind o sling that sailors sleep in .
They take them to the sea-shore and set them on the tide - A broom-stick for a paddle is all they have to guide And off they go to China or round the ports of Spain , To try and keep our sailing ships from coming home again .
An SSD is the obvious choice if so .
If a rotation is a symmetry of the lattice , it has to map the vectors that span the lattice onto integer linear combinations of themselves .
Taking out a loan to purchase a house is a serious financial commitment , but you are n't necessarily wedded to the same contract , or to the same lender , for the entirety of your mortgage .
Ah , what a feast was that !
For example , the report may say that a tumor is a non-small cell lung cancer with some characteristcis of small cell lung cancer .
Another big advantage of leasing a car is the lack of financial commitment to the vehicle .
Finally , the other big advantage of leasing a car is the tax deduction that may be taken if the vehicle is used for business purposes .
A directed graph , or digraph G consists of a finite nonempty set of vertices V , and a finite set of edges E , where an edge is an ordered pair of vertices in V. Vertices are also commonly referred to as nodes .
Recall that the defining feature of a recession is a sharp increase in the fraction of households with members facing job losses .
Following the commonly used OECD scale , the number of adult equivalents in a household is a weighted sum of household members in which the first adult is given a weight of 1 , each additional adult has a weight of 0.7 and each member under the age of 17 has a weight of 0.5 .
The mass number " A " of a nucleus is the number of nucleons ( protons and neutrons ) it contains .
The binding energy of a nucleus is a measure of how tightly its protons and neutrons are held together by the nuclear forces .
A writer was the only thing I ever truly wanted to be .
No harbours along this cliff-lined shore When , blown by storms , Menelaus passed this way , Still far from his home Bringing her , once the Trojans ' prize ( Can a war be a prize ? ) The phantom , Now with a squadron of Greek ships as escort , The replica , Hera 's notion .
So I must assume that a vacuum is an area of space that has nothing in it .
A kung-an is a story of an incident between a master and one or more disciples , which involves an understanding or experience of enlightened mind .
It is likely that an upturned boat on the beach that was used as a house was the inspiration for Peggotty 's house in the story .
Harvesting and preparing beluga meat together as a family is an integral part of what it means to be Inuvialuit .
The number of handles on a surface is another visual characteristic .
It 's simply that embarking on a spirit quest with a companion is a more intense experience than going alone .
A complaint is an expression of dissatisfaction requiring a response .
For duck stamps , the true equivalent of a cover is a signed stamp on license ( see illustration ) .
i ) An animal film : a parrot is the Tiresias and chorus of the plot , the most discerning character is a bird stuffed with straw ( the only one who knows its condition ) .
( A marriage was an economic transaction , in that a young couple was given gifts and help by the entire village ; naturally , no one wanted to invest in a union that would n't last . ) Typically , then , it was aunts and uncles ( or brothers and sisters , if they were old enough ) who found partners for a boy or girl of marriageable age .
There is a rabbinic saying , " Whoever eats with an idolater is the same as he who would eat with a dog .
Paging through a copy is a cheery , myth-shattering experience .
A nodemap is a new way to present information .
A wager was a common enough explanation for our own exploits , but it seemed an original reason for taking notes .
* The idea of only showing Chas 's wife through a picture is an idea from Paris , Texas .
That a word is the first example people usually give to illustrate the concept of what a sign is ?
That a word is the first > example people usually give to illustrate the concept of what a sign is ?
> > - Fred I think that a film is a reponse to , possibly , everything that has gone in the world prior to its existence .
Intuitively , it is clear that saying something in the course of a conversation is an adequate device for introducing a change in the sociocultural environment of the participants , i.e. , saying something can arouse reactions on the part of hearers in the same way that altering the physical or physiological environment can produce reactions .
This method involves the assumption that a conversation is a linear process marked off into distinct zones by reference to which the possible sub-grouping are actualized .
We believe that the reason for this difficulty has been the idee fixe or fixated idea that a transcript is an incomplete or impoverished record of the conversation .
What impressed me to stick around for a week was the transparency-like menus with some of the additional themes I could install ...
( A model is an abstraction of the economy , typically a mathematical description of economic interdependencies . ) Solow and Swan 's modeled economy also obeyed the law of diminishing returns , with each new unit of capital ( given a fixed labor supply ) bringing a slightly lower return than the preceding unit .
each performance of a piece is a unique musical event .
An ephor was an official of ancient Sparta .
This plan of a marriage was the result of political considerations and was intended to be the ratification of a great alliance which in the political schemes of the time it was sought to form against the German Emperor Otto IV , a member of the house of Guelph , who had quarrelled with the Church .
HOROWITZ : A tetrahedron is a four-sided equilateral structure that resembles a pyramid .
A figure is an example of this type of item .
We 'll give you our best answer , but remember schools change and teachers differ and a parent is the best judge .
An example is the ubiquitous Russian sage , which is beloved for its clear blue flowers and drought tolerance .
A control is a set of base values against which you compare the data from your experiments .
Doug Baldwin getting open for that 51 - yard pass after Wilson ran around for a while was the kind of stuff that happens during a two-hand touch game .
A restaurant is a community gathering spot , and that sense of community can be very rewarding .
A moulage is a practice scenario , where you have a patient to assess and manage appropriately .
A resource is the total quantity of a mineral found in the earth 's crust .
A reserve is the fraction of the resource which has been identified , quantified and is cost-effective to exploit .
I ask because there 's a common stance I 'm sure you 've come across that belief in an afterlife is a form of death-avoidance , a way of anulling the fear of death .
Yes , yes , we all know that committing a massacre is a bad thing , but if you want to look for motivating justifications , look to a school culture that thinks - and acts - as if the application of force by bullies is excusable .
Thinking through a show is a hallmark of the cable programming we 've come to expect over the past decade .
Romance on a dime is a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program , an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for sites to earn advertising fees by advertising and linking to amazon.com .
I think that it 's vital children are taught about religion , regardless of whether a person is a practicing anything it can only help with understanding the world one is in .
] not really a chocolate dessert person , so I decided a blondie was the way to go !
" Should the Illinois Constitution be amended to say , ' To secure and preserve the benefits of marriage for our society and for future generations of children , a marriage between a man and a woman is the only legal union that shall be valid or recognized in this State ' ?
After all , a calorie is a unit of heat .
A unit is an egg or an ounce of meat .
A mixer is a kitchen appliance intended for mixing , folding , beating , and whipping food ingredients .
A mixer is a much slower device without blades .
I would say that such a binding is a necessary evil of markup because there is nothing inherently built-in in web semantics to infer such a binding , but to be quite honest I think John Reilly 's solution points at such a built-in solution and pattern .
A plutocrat is a man who , having the possession of capital , and having the power of it at his disposal , uses it , not industrially , but politically ; instead of employing laborers , he enlists lobbyists .
Health care as a commodity is a horrible policy .
You are only in class for , at the most , 6 hours a day while a workday is a minimum of 8 hours .
The negative liberty in a contract is the freedom of consenting individuals to profess agreement with one another about a course of action .
The positive liberty in a contract is the power of those individuals to invoke state force in support of their plans .
A resolve is a property you can attach to a route in both ngRoute and the more robust UI router .
For Tim O ' Brien , a paragraph a day is a miracle .
A code is a system of symbols , letters , words , or signals that are used instead of ordinary words and numbers to send messages or store information .
The cost of obtaining a visa is the sole responsibility of the Competitor .
All trademarks , tradenames , and / or tradestyles used in the Tournament and a Competition are the sole property of the respective owners of such trademarks , tradenames , and / or tradestyles and are used herein solely for identification purposes .
Because maintaining a family is the hardest thing to do in this world .
And you must not have struggled or learned anything about the world if you think maintaining a family is the hardest thing to do in it .
" Because maintaining a family is the hardest thing to do in this world .
People starving , dying , being tortured and abused , rotting in horrible situations , but maintaining a family is the HARDEST thing ?
After all , these are very different concepts : a conditional is a sentence , which can be true or false ; an argument or inference is an act , a consecution of assertions , which can be valid or invalid ; a consequence is a relation between sentential / propositional entities , which can hold or fail to hold ( Sundholm 1998 ) .
A deduction is a discourse in which , certain things being stated , something other than what is stated follows of necessity from their being so .
When it is said that " an animal is a substance ; therefore a man is a substance " is a good consequence I reply that this consequence does not hold in virtue of form ( ratione formae ) , but rather in virtue of matter .
What characterizes them as a group is the definition of formal consequence based on the substitutivity criterion , in the spirit of ( ST ) ( more on this below ) .
Ockham 's example of a consequence holding immediately in virtue of an extrinsic middle is ' Only a man is a donkey , therefore every donkey is a man ' , which holds in virtue of this general rule : ' an exclusive and a universal with transposed terms signify the same and are convertible ' .
" This is noticeable not only in the definitions of formal ( as opposed to material ) consequence , but also in the very definitions of consequence which begin to mention mental acts , such as : " a consequence is a derivation ( illatio ) of the consequent from the antecedent " ( Strode , quoted in Normore 1993 , 449 ) .
Fishing in a tournament is a little easier because you only fish for eight hours at a time .
Although a number of armies have stayed true to their tried-and-tested support vehicle formats ( an example being the British Army 's use of the Land Rover since 1948 ) the Land Cruiser has a great deal of impact itself in military and police use .
An enclave is a piece of land that is totally surrounded by a foreign country , while an exclave is one that is politically attached to a larger piece but not geographically connected to it .
Pi loves to wax philosophical about the inmates : " In many ways , running a zoo is a hotelkeeper 's worst nightmare .
In our framework , environment is the abstract analogous of state concept ; an environment is a function from program variables to abstract symbolic values .
A case is a relation which is " important " for an event in the context in which it is described .
A third is the ability to handle the many different kinds of problems which occupy the congressional agenda at any time .
An arrest is a wholly different kind of intrusion upon individual freedom from a limited search for weapons , and the interests each is designed to serve are likewise quite different .
[ p 31 ] Such a search is a reasonable search under the Fourth Amendment , and any weapons seized may properly be introduced in evidence against the person from whom they were taken .
How ironic a sentence is that ?!
Instead , a correction is another way to communicate with your dog , to foster in him a clear understanding of his place in your human pack .
Be sure to walk your cat in an area that 's free of such dangers as off-leash dogs , since a terrified cat on a leash is no fun to handle .
To coordinate such an event is no small task .
So far as the Fourteenth Amendment is concerned , the presence of a defendant is a condition of due process to the extent that a fair and just hearing would be thwarted by his absence , and to that extent only .
It is not to be found in judgments of the courts that at other times or in other circumstances the presence of a defendant is a postulate of justice .
A goiter is an enlargement of the thyroid gland , As shown here ; an enlarged thyroid can be seen as a swelling in the front of the neck .
A wound is any break in the continuity of the tissues of the body , either external or internal .
Of such a character was the last memorial of the Grand Monarque of Egypt , whose glory had shone over the countries and whose honorary statues that were set up during his lifetime had reached the dimensions of a colossus - so huge that modern mechanical skill has shrunk from the attempt to remove them .
Of course , the greatest enhancement to a meal was the company in which he found himself .
By each man 's foot stood a quart of champagne in a silver cooler - & an extra one on a sideboard-there was no other wine 1st course-Very small raw oysters-just that moment opened , & swimming in their own sea water .
: A scab is a scab is a scab ...
A scab is a scab is a scab .
Conceptually , an object is the mapping of a logical name ( example , a URI ) to a physical location , such as a URL .
The default identification for an object is a URI .
( 2 ) Despite a change in its membership , the council of a municipality is a continuing body and may complete any proceedings started but not completed before the change .
An endoscope is a thin , tube-like instrument used to look at tissues inside the body .
Sometimes you want ruins to form because a ruin is an adventure environment , but you also want ruins to not always just be ruins , they 're just a place that was razed and then it gets repopulated , or a place where , like you were saying an adventurer goes off on a little tipsy little journey there causing trouble , as people occasionally have that impulse to do that .
Proteins are polymers ; a polymer is a chemical entity formed by smaller subunits , called monomers , organized very much like the links in a chain .
The trick to make all these different proteins that are specific to an organism is the type of amino acids and the precise order in which they are arranged .
Giving someone a nickname is a personal and if it is not flattering then it is an attack .
You may have finally gotten the keys , but do n't forget that a car is a big responsibility .
A warranty is a contract that guarantees maintenance if your car has any mechanical or other problems .
The purring maggot is one of the great mysteries of the game , because a maggot is a larval form , right ?
They say a picture is worth a thousand words but in the case of Japanese paper , a picture is a very poor representative of the real thing .
For a kids show , The Doctor 's moral dilemma was an chewy one , and his decided course of action to turn the Star Whale into a vegetable was a bit grisly , played really well too .
A bonus is the milkweed poetry , lore and symbolism knitted into the narrative .
An IRA is an account type that has certain tax characteristics .
the concordance of material , production and function of an object is a determining factor in Morris 's design work , and much as it may be attributed to his preference for mediaevalist aesthetic practices , it is also responsible for his reputation as one of the " fathers " of modern design , in spite of his reservations about industrial production .
Note the assumptions that what gives credibility to a trial is the auspices under which it is performed rather than the fairness of the procedures and that the U.S. , more solicitous of defendants ' rights than any other country on Earth , is a less credible sponsor than an ersatz court whose judges will probably include representatives of tyrannies with no concept of due process .
An injury is an injury .
Being able to drop one down for a hit is a nice weapon for him to have .
A treatment is a natural call that carries a specific message about the suit bid or the general strength of the hand .
EXAMPLE : 4 , openings which are natural but are weaker than might be expected because the partnership has some other method ( an example is the Namyats convention ) for showing a good 4 , opening .
A list is a collection of data .
An example is the determination of what kind of temperature recording systems specific ships used , so that their logs can be readjusted individually .
A culture is a group of people with rather similar grids .
An exception is a short fallow period from harvest ofa summer forage crop in August to a September wheat planting .
Barr avoids most technical details ( an exception is some discussion of buses and video hardware in the chapters on SoftImage ) and offers separate digressions on Code , APIs , and Middleware .
A furuncle is a tender , erythematous , firm or fluctuant mass of walled-off purulent material , arising from the hair follicle , occurring as a result of the spread of the bacterial infection deeper into the tissues of the follicles , beneath the infundibulum .
There is no single perfect treatment for infection by molluscum contagiosum , and scraping off the bumps using a tool called a curette is a common way to surgically remove them .
Whether individuals have an essence is a good question .
Platonism and Buddhism might toy with the idea that such a Fall is a consequence of ignorance , but there is no reasonable explanation why ignorance , or any other defect , would be present in a pre-lapsarian reality .
In contrast , a mystery is a problem , a challenge that has depth , staying-power , mana .
In general , where the distinctive objects of a subject-matter are a , b , c , ...
The upper strata and middle strata is not occupied in most cichlid tanks , so appearance and completing the pictorial view of an aquarium is a possible need .
One example of an oddity is the trial in 1600 of two brothers , then dead , for an attempt on the life of the king .
The pure love and desire that a bodhisattva expresses when becoming a nirmanakaya is the spiritual aspect of trishna .
Among the Jews the name and profession of a publican was the most odious thing in the world .
Metric or Imperial , Snag , a nuke 's a nuke .
So I find it in no way surprising that the " Idea of a Satellite " , which in a sense is an artificial planet of sorts obeying the same gravitational and inertial rules as natural planets , is something the Roman was likely to consider .
Who cares where the opportunity comes from , a challenge is a challenge !
The next we hear of it is between 1160 and 1182 , when four bovates of land were given to Meaux Abbey , together with two-thirds of the fee of the " Wyke of Myton " ( A bovate was the area of land which could be ploughed by an ox in a year , and a fee was land or freehold property which could be inherited ) Meaux is pronounced " Muce " .
According to a third reading , which is orthogonal to the others , a paradigm is a fundamentally sociological entity , individuated and constituted by patterns of education and alliances .
A challenge is the reconciliation of process-based and elements-based perspectives on biodiversity .
Trade-offs applications based on complementarity have suggested that other values can be integrated without much penalty to biodiversity goals [ an example is A Biodiversity Conservation Plan for Papua New Guinea Based on Biodiversity Trade-offs Analysis ] .
" I was afraid of the shakes , I said , " A drink is the only thing that will stop it .
A salbut is a crucifix , and a musallab is an intersection of two roads .
A memorial is a strong symbol of moral community ; sharing and re-sharing an illicit memory creates such a moral community .
Having an AUDIENCE is another variable . .
Further , recognizing that building a career is a longitudinal process , not a discrete event , the Societies provide a context and opportunity for gaining advice over time from a broad array of individuals , ranging from peers to those students who are farther along in their training to the faculty .
Simply calling or showing up at a school is the most direct path to a job , and you wo n't have to look far .
" The type of joy that is a mitzvah is the joy you share with those less fortunate such as orphans , widows , those without a family and poor people .
An agnostic is a doubter .
Neither , incidentally , is it a property of objects of class HIT that if a CREATURE is the victim then that happens .
A mystic is a person who is puzzled before the obvious , but who understands the nonexistent .
A creed is an ossified metaphor .
A miracle is an event described by those to whom it was told by people who did not see it .
To discover a law of the heavens was an impiety , to find a world was a heresy .
A miracle is a violation of the laws of nature , and as a firm and unalterable experience has established these laws , the proof against a miracle , from the very nature of the fact , is as entire as any argument from experience can possibly be imagined ...
How can a piece of matter which is a human be the basis for the experience each one of us recognizes as what it 's like to be us ?
Defined in psychological terms , a fanatic is a man who consciously over-compensates a secret doubt .
A theocracy is an interesting atmosphere to create for a game because it is so rigid .
A dermatologist is a medical specialist who diagnoses and treats diseases of the skin , hair and nails .
An essence is the ultimate nature of a thing , without which it cannot exist , and the Ancient Greeks thought that everything in the universe was made up of combinations of these elements .
A sabot was a large , heavy wooden clog made of a single piece of wood and worn by workers .
shambles - a place or condition of great disorder Like the Latin and then Old English words from which it is derived , a shambles was a bench .
Requirements for a village : Out here , the requirements for a village were a mine , a smith and a saloon .
In Colorado the requirements for a village were a few mines , several saloons , equal numbers of brothels and churches and just maybe a smith - if one could be found who had n't already succumbed to gold fever .
A pangram is a sentence constructed using all the letters of the alphabet .
A. We always enjoy reading letters from employers because they often speak to your overall responsibility , ability to work effectively in teams , your communication skills , your leadership , etc. But what is often missing in a letter from an employer is the ability to speak specifically to your potential for success in a rigorous science curriculum .
Humans tend to suffer from sensory fatigue ; a sign is a lot more noticeable when it is placed on a blank wall than when it is added to dozens of other messages .
A cookie is a small piece of text information that a Web site stores in the Web browser .
A firewall is a security system designed to prevent unauthorized access to or from a private network .
Banbridge did pick themselves up for a period after the goal but a point was all they had for their efforts .
It 's impossible for the Mewtwo to counter , with a switch being the only way out .
On the other hand , a preference is a simple desire or want .
A tag is a singular entity that opens or closes an element .
The definition of what is protectible as a design is an interesting one , namely , the appearance of the whole or a part of a product comprising elements or features of ornamentation , drawing , pattern , configuration , color , texture , material or resiliency that appeal to human senses .
To a player , a quest is any non-trivial task that has some definite end and hoped-for reward .
A myth is a fixed way of looking at the world which cannot be destroyed because , looked at through the myth , all evidence supports the myth .
Strictly speaking , a mobile is an object that can ( in game terms ) move or otherwise act of its own volition which is controlled by the game itself .
For MUDs , it 's enough that something behaves generally sensibly and occasionally surprisingly ; no-one 's going to think a mobile is a real player for long ( if at all ) , but that does n't mean we have to make them dumb .
A deacon is a man who can be trusted .
I never had thought that a hospital was a logical place to find a forge and anvil till I met a retired WWII orthopedic blacksmith and one of a squad of them attached to a local hospital .
As you have said many times befor , the only thing traditional about a smith is the constant innovation used to get the job done .
There is no single universal criteria of determining if a formation is an arch or a window or a hole .
Becoming a member is a way for you to support this free content , and the members-only features are token rewards for doing so .
A transition can denote any regular expression , rather than just a symbol from the alphabet Note that a symbol is a kind of regular expression .
Being an adult is a process that is unique to the individual .
A collection is an object that represents a group of objects .
Just like many people assume the arrangement of keys on a keyboard are the way they are because that arrangement has been proven to enable the typist to type faster .
Deciding whether a point is an arrow point or a dart ( atlatl ) point depends on the artifact 's size , including its weight , shoulder width , and neck width .
Calling it a hunt is an insult to hunters .
The price thing is ridiculous , i 'm 14 so £ 50 to pay for a game is a hella lot of money .
" Keeping it a secret was the truly hard part .
And should n't a journal be a service to the * readers * , not the authors ?
A blog is the equivalent to a newsletter , and a blog with few updates would be equivalent to a weekly newsletter .
Windows and backup to a computer is the weak " link " of everything .
And certainly , the decision to be a nation-state rather than one of a group of states making up a nation is a perfectly valid possible position .
A palette is a place where paints are mixed .
Learning to read the value of a color is an important skill , needed to use colors well .
Bringing the concert to an end was the energetic , fast tempo , story of the Greek god Apollo with " Apollo Unleashed from Symphony No. 2 .
In the old days , the father of a girl was the one dude who could be counted upon to bring her back to reality .
A microburst is a very localized column of sinking air , producing damaging divergent and straight-line winds at the surface that are similar to , but distinguishable from , tornadoes , which generally have convergent damage .
An RCD is a life-saving device which is designed to prevent persons from getting a fatal electric shock if they touch something live , such as a bare wire .
My question is , given that if hydrogen is elemental and is therefore the same density throughout the universe and the critical mass required for hydrogen to fuse in the core of a protostar is a universal constant , why are stars formed in different sizes ?
She continues : " Actors love acting , and a soap is a long-term contract .
A urinal in a bathroom is a target , whereas that same urinal in the center of a gallery or park is a work of art because it is experienced in an uncommon way .
Running a hospital is a very different proposition to running a bank .
I think being a perfectionist is the curse of 3 d modeling .
Nevertheless , a thousand pounds a month is a lot of dosh and questions are being asked about the intelligence of a three-year rental contract that costs more than it would to pop along to the average computer store and buy something off the shelf , incurs brokerage charges and is for something that most party members consider extravagant to say the least .
A complaint is a concern , originating from outside HSE , about a work activity for which HSE is the enforcing authority .
176 A chimera was a Greek mythological fire-breathing female monster with a lion 's head , a goat 's body , and a serpent 's tail .
If a person is a clone , will they be afforded full human rights ?
I think that it is n't possible to clone a human , because with an animal , nowadays , it 's difficult and to do it with a human is a dream .
A census is a count of all the people and households in the United Kingdom .
So leather an fur is death to animals , then lets not use it an diamond is the suffer of cheeted man then fine lets not use them .
Much in the same way as a fraudster is a cheat .
Services should always work in partnership with parents / agencies to ensure the services are meeting the needs of families in their communities and encouraging parents and volunteers to participate to increase their skills and contribute to their community is one really the best way forward for communities but relying on them to provide a service is another !!!
Get in touch with a local Makaton teacher and make up some story cards about what it is realy like when a dog is a good part of the world in which we live .
A parish is a bit like a small business , and Brian has willingly involved himself in all the business aspects of parish life .
The second couple to win a prize was a very smart young Adolf ( sporting a very fetching pair of shorts ) and his companion Eva !
Not but what a flare is a bad thing to fall on you .
Anyone who is n't experimenting and trying new stuff is not going to get very far - a blog is a space you can do that .
The net effect of such a condition is a sensible decrease of the growth rate .
A policeman was the first to reach the wreckage and cried out , " l ' Empereur est mort !
To change a culture is no easy feat , this is something which needs to be embedded both bottom up and top down throughout the organization .
God only knows why we have them : such a practice is a gross abuse .
For new students joining Imperial College each year , the various Facebook groups for halls , subjects , and for the entire year of Freshers as a whole are an invaluable resource , both for specific questions and getting to know your future class / house / roommates ( delete as appropriate ) .
Then Christian gave three leaps for joy , and went on singing -- Thus far I did come laden with my sin ; Nor could aught ease the grief that I was in Till I came hither : What a place is this !
Turning around a company is a phrase normally linked to business failure .
Accepting a woman as a priest is a huge leap for me and I 'm very grateful to her .
Notice how almost all of the comments under a pseudonym are the ones defending this misogyny ?
" It was never a case of EDGE or WCDMA , which in a way was the perception .
A voice is a matter of taste and if someone is at least real in their approach as an artist , that is what talent means to me .
Essentially , a femtocell is a miniature mobile phone mast / base station which sits in your house or office .
To be given a card and a construction kit as a present was an unexpected pleasure .
Harold Wilson , a former prime minister once said : " A week is a long time in politics .
After your work , enjoy our health club - a dip in the indoor pool or a massage is the perfect end to a busy day , before a drink in the bar and dinner in our Steam , Bake and Grill restaurant .
The following verse which refers to " fields " is talking about the fact that a wife is the bearer of the husband 's children ( the metaphor here is about seeds in a field which grow and give fruits , may not be regarded by some as being the best metaphor there is but anyway , it must be remembered that for people in the desert , a field with trees and fruit must have had beautiful meanings ) .
A object is a JavaBeansTM component because it has properties and participates in the JavaBeans event notification mechanism .
When an object is the return value for a method , it is returned in the form of a generic object , either an object or a object .
But the move is important because a repossession is a hugely value-destroying activity .
The number one change needed for the Perfect Lean Market to become a reality is the technology to improve supply chain communications and effortlessly link lean systems with the rest of a company 's ERP systems .
A lot of times staying in an apartment is a great way to stretch your budget allowing you a bigger space for families and the ability to cook at ' home ' .
But such a change is a long shot , mostly because Netanyahu is right wing and his party shifted even further to the right in this year 's primaries .
My bad dress sense as a teenager is the stuff of legend .
A whitehead is a type of acne which occurs when there is a build-up of dead skin cells , sebum and bacteria , which cause a pore to become blocked .
A blackhead is a form of acne lesion medically known as an open comedone .
That might force them to consider the public-relations nightmare of " We believe that two dead children a year is an acceptable cost of business , " which could lead to a better evaluation of the future costs , and maybe even fewer dead children .
( 10 ) In addition to any other authority , if an animal control officer has reasonable grounds to believe that a dog is a dangerous dog , the officer may apply to the Provincial Court for an order that the dog be destroyed in the manner specified in the order .
My mom 's mother was a very tough old bird , an Iron Lady back when being such a thing was a social taboo .
51 ( 1 ) A record regarding a patient that is prepared in a hospital by an employee or by a practitioner is the property of the hospital .
Waiting at an intersection was a man , who , when asked , suggested that the little girl go south , for that was where the big cities were .
Finding a builder was a bit of a hassle , but we managed .
[ Last month , we wrote : " We know a jackeroo is an apprentice stockman or cowboy ( the female counterpart is jilleroo ) , and we guess that the word combines jack-of-all-trades with kangaroo .
by George Eastman House Where To Find Beautiful Sofa Collections A sofa is the highlight of any plush and comfortable living room .
An abrasive is a material that is used to sand , sharpen , or smooth out a surface .
A descendent is the ColdFire ?
And trying to run a government as though it were a business is a recipe for trouble , if not disaster .
That aside however , the real point is that a government is a very different organization from a business , and we do n't accurately judge a government using a business model .
We quickly discovered that a twike is an electric-powered twin bike , hand-assembled in Switzerland , where several hundred have been sold .
I mean , the last thing you expect whilst shopping for milk in a supermarket is some cunt farting directly into your face .
The cockeyed.com article which worked you into a tizzy was the result of him satisfying his own curiosity about ass-ugly signs appearing on telephone polls .
An investment is a single financial account , life insurance policy , rental property , or any other resource providing a return to its owner .
A reformer is a guy who rides through the sewer in a glass bottom boat .
I do not have 10 % of the value of the hovel saved up even if I was prepared to move into a bijou studio in the middle of chav fucking central - A mortgage is a long term investment .
I do n't feel the need to know everything about an artist 's every waking moment .
Participants represent a wide range of rural vocations , not just farming , and to see what can be achieved when we worked together as a team is a lesson that needs to be learnt across our rural landscape .
, find out if a tarantula is the right pet for you , and keep in mind before deciding that some of the females can live in excess of 30 years in captivity if well looked after !.
If an individual was a member of a partnership in a particular year but you did not identify him as such until after the imposition of fixed automatic penalties for that year see subject ' Set Up Partner ' ( SAM 100230 ) for further guidance .
" He said : ' To the eyes of a man of commerce , a tree is a green thing that stands in the way ' .
Being accountable for the keys to a store was a huge responsibility , along with the other added duties such as running a shift , ensuring employees are happy with their roles and that they are doing their tasks correctly .
The point was put to us that the only issue that had been an objective was the budget .
" a person is an absent parent in relation to more than one child and the other parent of .
The circumstances that we have in mind are , in particular , when a victim is a vulnerable person , is under 18 years of age or perhaps is not able or willing to give evidence against the suspect .
An inauguration is a time of hope and introspection , when we look to the president as a reflection of ourselves .
It 's just that a biography is the work of a storyteller .
well you know ... an astronaut 's all well and good , but a CCNA is really just one step closer to becoming a Tech-Priest !!!
Sale of 5 tractors , combine & a wide range of agricultural machinery , tools etc. Buying , selling or extending a property is a big financial commitment and it is vital that you take advice and choose the right surveyor RICS members are ...
If you serve ' teabag tea ' to an Iraqi , you risk scorn and disdain - a teabag is an insult to tea connoisseurs .
7 An algorithm is a set of logical rules or mathematical specification of a process which may be implemented in a computer .
' This reflection , however , is a mistake ; for it rests on the false principle that every condition of a good is a good .
Not every condition of a good is a good .
But you cannot destroy a person 's chastity by force , because chastity being a virtue is a matter of free will .
In its appeal filed last Monday , the state argued that it has the constitutional authority to define marriage , and the union of a man and a woman is the best setting to bear and rear children .
These issues are different for men and women ; in this culture , " having a career is a consequence of being male " ( ibid . , p 150 ) .
But a blacksmith is a blacksmith and their mistake may be to your benefit .
As little as 30 minutes a day is all it takes to proactively improve your circulation .
The strength throughout one 's self and a stone are that which will determine their endurance and eventual outcome .
A clock is a little machine that shuts us out from the wonder of time .
Losing a manager and a co-producer was a further carelessness , and changing the name of the band just when things were beginning to take off might have been thought unwise .
Fixing a plate is an act of love , a quiet promise that no matter how bad things get , there is always this stove , this simmering pot , this ability to stretch a dish from one household into the rest of the neighborhood .
Thirdly , we now have self-related externality ; as self-related it is also a sublated externality and has within itself the difference from itself-the difference which , as an externality is the quantitative , and as taken back into itself is the qualitative , moment .
A wart is a small hard lump on the skin , and twenty five years ago we hated to be near a person with warts .
A grant was a contract within the meaning of the Constitution .
A grant is a contract executed , and a party is always estopped by his own grant .
The terms " contract " and " compact " were synonymous ; and a contract is an agreement of two or more parties to do or not to do certain acts .
For each edge , there are three attributes that specify if an edge is a bridge with isBridge , a tunnel with isTunnel or a tollway with isTollway .
A class is a style that is applied to an element only if it has an attribute ui.cla ss which contains the name of the style class .
A salon is a gathering of people under the roof of an inspiring host , held partly to amuse one another and partly to refine taste and increase their knowledge of the participants through conversation .
That ephemeral quality of vanishing and the way a flat shape can appear to be a volume are the points of transformation we are made aware of by these surprisingly dynamic installations .
A clique is the most stringent classification of a network subgroup , requiring at least 3 actors who are in direct , reciprocal relationships with one another .
One such an incident was the massacre of Van that on which we have evidences from mass graves belonging to muslims ( Qoran , cloths , accesoirs etc ) .
In the absence of kiss-and-tell revelations , figuring out the sexuality of a celebrity is a task so speculative you might as well toss a coin .
Such a zone is a legally enforced gap between an open-cast mine and a residential settlement .
The same person that reports him for a crime is the person inviting him to Sweden .
The only reason that it did not end up with a majority was the in-built advantage to the Labour party .
she thought a quarterback was a refund .
An EAD is the Export Accompanying Document that includes a bar code of consignment information , including the MRN and declared Office of Exit ( box 29 ) .
His photographs - of the great and the good , the debauched and , occasionally , the dying - have endured chiefly because they are so evocative of a time when a photographer was a friend and confidant to stars happy to be snapped without make-up or airbrushing , and without the interference of managers and PRs .
You think that potted meat on a saltine is an hors d ' ouerve 6 .
If a guest is a breakfast talker it 's very important to invite another so they can talk to each other .
To kill a dove is a sign of death to the negroes of louisiana .
The relationship between different providers of education within a locality is an important element in making clear to young people the different options ahead of them .
Although the later a letter is the more likely it is to get used in the morning Inbox instead .
A startup is an institution , not just a product , and so it requires a new kind of management specifically geared to its context of extreme uncertainty .
Building a startup is an exercise in institution building ; thus , it necessarily involves management .
Modems A modem is a device which allows a computer to send and receive information over a telephone line .
" A flotation is a growing-up stepping stone for a business , " admits Owens .
An example is the banking system , which sends out credit cards automatically when their customers ' old one has expired , this requires an efficient process to identify expiry dates and renewal .
A soakaway is a pit , which is typically filled with hard core , and into which waste water is piped so that it drains slowly out into the surrounding soil in the area .
As you know , buying a house is the most important purchase a consumer can make .
A sceptic is a healthy thing to be .
A form is a code / UI template that Outlook uses > to display and run code for individual items .
A form is a code / UI template that Outlook uses > > to display and run code for individual items .
A form is a code / UI template that Outlook > > uses > > to display and run code for individual items .
A form is a code / UI template that Outlook uses > > > to display and run code for individual items .
At the point of matching data , there is no obvious indication as to whether a case is an innocent oversight or deliberate concealment so each case has to be treated individually and with discretion as there may be non entitlement .
Two-thirds of the way through a story is the point where the hero traditionally hits rock bottom , and at page 211 in the paperback version , we arrive there , as Percy writes : " My clothes on fire , poison coursing through my veins , I plummeted towards the river .
imo the reason we motorists are continually being attacked and penalised is because owning a car is a visible sign that we can afford to pay .
Electric chemistry of a touch is a great one too ... that stolen moment when the world just stops and you think " wow " ...
I 'm not sure that slapping people 's hands with a ruler is the best way to keep control and might result in even more unruliness .
( 2 ) For the purposes of this Act , to the extent that public notice is given of the fact that the use of a trade-mark is a licensed use and of the identity of the owner , it shall be presumed , unless the contrary is proven , that the use is licensed by the owner of the trade-mark and the character or quality of the wares or services is under the control of the owner .
Where an invention is a significant improvement over technology disclosed in patents and other public sources called " prior art , " the situation is more complicated .
" Figure " , because the action of a figure is a symbolic one .
In general , a deferment is a period during which repayment of the principal and interest of your loan is temporarily delayed .
" For him to make that kind of impact as a freshman was an amazing thing back then .
Doing this to a country is a truly serious thing .
Speaking generally , a bank is a moneyed institution to facilitate the borrowing , lending and caring for money .
In the famous Dartmouth College Case , 4 Wheat 518 , it was held that the charter of a corporation is a contract protected by that clause of the national constitution , which prohibits a state from passing any law impairing the obligation of contracts .
For most people , dropping a pen is an inconsequential event .
A precondition is a test to make sure that the client ( the code calling this method ) has fulfilled its part of the contract .
If , then , your rights , your interests , your property , your lives are not sufficiently protected , there is a power is this grand old Commonwealth sufficient to protect them at all tinges We , however , have no post facto law We punish no man but by virtue of the law as it exists at the time the alleged offense was committed .
Our family loves leftovers because the grandchildren are beginning to move out on their own , start families , go to school or begin entry-level jobs ; a left-over is a break in the Ramen noodle diet .
A good example of a rash challenge leading to a penalty was the one by Stevie G against the arse at Anfield this season .
Hundreds of emails a day is a real hindrance sometimes .
Do n't get me wrong , having a blog is a great idea .
For previous generations of game designers , choosing a clone was the easiest way to build upon an established success , but it also preyed on gamers ' aversion to novelty .
A swap is a great way to get a peek into other people 's stash and to get rid of some yarns you wo n't use in favor of some that , hopefully , you will .
I feel like a celebrity being the center of attention .
A library is a group of these class files .
The flehman or lip curl of a bull is an example of a fixed pattern which requires no learning .
A rockspec is a special Lua file ending in that describes meta-data about a Lua module .
Whatever you do now when you design and write a program is a methodology .
isControl checks whether a character is a control character .
isSpace checks whether a character is a white-space characters .
isAlpha checks whether a character is a letter .
isAlphaNum checks whether a character is a letter or a number .
isDigit checks whether a character is a digit .
isOctDigit checks whether a character is an octal digit .
isHexDigit checks whether a character is a hex digit .
isLetter checks whether a character is a letter .
isSymbol checks whether a character is a fancy mathematical or currency symbol .
Las Vegas Wedding Music Package 5 : Brass Quartet Two trumpets , tuba , and a trombone are the classic combinations for this option .
A theme is a template for your site - it creates the layout , and when you customize it and start adding posts , you create the personality .
People will not embrace liberal values simply because a Volkswagen is a nicer car than a Trabant .
Do n't let these officious sounding requirements deter you if you feel that a plc is the type for you , a chartered company secretary really only has a part time involvement in the running of your business .
Being a nanny is an extremely rewarding profession , an opportunity to help young children through the first few years of their life , there is often the prospect of travel and freedom throughout the day .
Automatic garage doors are perfect for cold and wintry conditions too , as one click of a button is all you need to operate the doors .
One popular solution for garages where space is a premium is the installation of sectional doors Reading .
A cooper was a man who made the wooden barrels for the cider to be stored in .
I suggest you do so , because anyone that is a Muslim is a threat to this country , and that 's a fact , " Harris told the Arizona Capitol Times .
A rack Is a rack , is a rack ?
A cadre is an employee with a specialist level of knowledge , seniority and / or responsibilities , able to work autonomously and / or to supervise the work of other employees .
Second , a package is a way to make your code available to other GAP users .
The package wrapping tools for the GAP distribution and web pages then will use a sensible list of file extensions to decide if a file is a text file ( being conservative , it may miss a few text files ) .
Relax to some music Listening to music or even playing an instrument is an excellent way to work through your angry feelings .
If lying were just like other faults that showed themselves at times and then disappeared leaving no trace ; for to break a window is a thing like that - you can break a window in a moment of aggressiveness or stupidity or activity , get it repaired and the thing 's done with and finished with for good and all !
A community is a group of people having a direct understanding of each other , common standards of value and behaviour , the same basic principles , a feeling of responsibility for each other and a willingness to work together for the good of all .
Not a person but a type is the product .
This is now our fourth season of operations which has seen an increase is the range of sports and bet types we offer , plus the addition of a recently introduced casino .
A crime is a crime , whether it is committed by a white , black or Asian person .
Having a baby as a teenager is a tragedy for a girl , her child and society .
The statement " An object is the same thing as itself " is conceptually equivalent to " a given combination of elementary particles always yields the same physical entity " .
Finally , I 'd like to know if you agree with my argument that the statements " an object is the same thing as itself " and " a given combination of elementary particles always yields the same physical entity " have the same logical consequences .
Indeed , it is meaningless to say that " a thing is the same thing as itself " in a scenario where nothing can possibly be .
Perfo - 3-2-2010 at 13:29 13:29 The noisiest part of a babington is the compressor .
Its the same as using the word ' hohophobic ' - a phobia is an irrationl fear of something .
kingpleb - 22-1-2009 at 15:26 15:26 Ok per acre that is a lot bt an acre is a measure of flat land .
Originally posted by kingpleb Ok per acre that is a lot bt an acre is a measure of flat land .
The situation is this : - Quidco claim to offer 100 % Cashback - this I know for a fact is a complete lie , if Quidco say they are offering 5 % cashback from a Merchant they are really getting more as they get kick backs , bonuses and performance increased commissions from the Merchants - more money for Quidco .
" ' The first one I saw firing a shot was the Major at the barricade in Sackville Street and he pulled out a short arm , which was on a rope or lanyard .
I do seem to struggle with the creative bit though , but I am sure time an practice is the answer !!
As you may know , an adverb is a word that describes the way we carry out an action , and therefore usually comes packaged up with a verb : He ran quickly .
DON ' T offend as an adult is all i can say !
' He added : ' One of the main reasons for requesting a cease-fire is the return of the displaced persons .
it is It is especially important to estimate your costs wisely because an FSA is a use it or lose it plan and money leftover in the account after the plan year ends will be forfeited .
The focus on and backdrop of the art world is also one that never gets old , and the scenes of Rush running an auction are a lot of fun .
He believes the only thing that scares a maniac is another maniac , and he devises a plan to do everything to Dror that was done to his daughter .
" -- Edith Wharton ( Shared by J.T. ) " A diamond is a lump of coal that stuck with it .
What will really capture an audience is the passion with which the orator speaks and not the place that they are in - the audience will be transported to another time and place in their minds if their muse is eloquent enough and for this you can be anywhere .
Any site with a comment section in which one person makes a game joke and literally every other registered member follows up with a continuation is the kind of place I want to hang my cat .
I do n't recall any major anti-disengagement demonstrations here , but in any event you 're right : a demonstration is a sign of engagement with the political process , not withdrawal .
It has become a bit of a cliché to say that what is needed for good journalism to have an effect is an ecosystem of which strong media outlets are just one part .
We chatted a bit about various things , then I reintroduced the problem , and it turned out that we 'd simply tripped up over a language problem : to Jean , a bug was a calculation error , not something that caused lost files .
Dolgov 's next project as a curator was the exhibition " Ruins of Utopia " at X.L.A.M. Gallery in Voronezh ( 2011 ) .
What convinced me to become a pilot was the challenge .
My favorite " lost in translation " anecdote is about the time I had to explain to a French developer why my loss of an entire morning 's work qualified as a bug in his software ; to him , a bug was a calculation error .
When not explicitly set , the context classloader for a thread is the same as the context classloader of the thread that created this thread .
But more fun and interesting in a way is the video interview series that the company has done : people " on the street " discussing their shopping behavior .
A centroid is the center of gravity of a geographic unit .
Shaving milliseconds off of the time it takes to make a transaction is the difference between profit and loss .
However , defining a macro is a bit more complicated because FOO supports two flavors of macro .
In terms of " history " , a cherry-pick is the same as " take a diff of that commit versus it 's parent , and apply that same change here in this branch , and commit " .
Thus Naomi Watts , Mark Ruffalo , Laura Dern , and some other bloke with a beard are the neighbouring couples , who are all getting it on , one way or another , with their other halves next door .
A showcase is the sort of place where you could attract interest from theatres , agents , retailers , distributors , journalists , radio and TV and all aspects of the entertainment industry .
Although to call the confrontation a battle is a considerable exaggeration , the consequences of the event were far reaching .
A lecture is a session where all the students are assembled , and the lecturer makes a presentation .
" A smile is the killer weapon , it disarms the other person , when you smile at someone they will smile back and you are immediately seen as a nice person .
How serious an issue is this for the minority communities ?
A dermatologist is a doctor who specialises in treating skin conditions .
If you like drinking more , eating in better places , or buy more tat , then £ 50 a couple is a good budget .
where a H is the " activity " of hydrogen ions in the solution .
( Getting into a routine is the sticking point sometimes , but once you 've done that , the practice is lovely .
When he knows that a thing is an illusion he is less likely to see it again .
Being a terrorist is the path to Allah .
A wifebeater is a type of vest - it has thicker straps .
Ability to work within a team is a must , post will be based on Clients site so you must also be professional , self motivated , hard working and positive .
The difference between a nice person and a monster is a million miles .
I see running a business is a way of life , not just " what you do " , as the 9 -5 ' ers like to discuss their careers .
tampons if you use them , can make pains more painful at times try changing to a towel is another option - just a thought that might help .
A good set of gardening loppers can cut through tree branches up to 1.5 inches thick , so the rotting fingers of a zombie are no problem .
An astigmatism is a vision problem where the surface of the eye ( the cornea ) or the lens , is more oval-shaped , rather than round .
An orthoptist is a health professional who is specially trained to assess and manage children with squint and amblyopia .
An ophthalmoscope is a special torch used to examine the back of the eye ( the retina ) .
Making sure this does n't happen 1.5 million times a month is a scale of operations that only McDonald 's can pull off .
he did look like a spoilt brat , not just dissapointed , he should realise a podium is a priviledge many drivers in f 1 never get to experience .
I would say the difference between a self employed person / person who happens to own his own business and a businessman is the ability to adapt , rather than just have the suitable skills that meet the markets need at one given point of it evolution .
And lets face it a dog is a non-judgmental companion in times of loneliness who rather than wanting to take us for every penny wants nothing more than to take us for a walk .
To fell a tree was a crime , even to cut a branch . ...
Shipwreck Exploration Discovering a shipwreck is a unique opportunity in itself however the discovery of a famous shipwreck is a once in a lifetime occurrence .
A point is the very essence of something , as in the point of an idea .
A point is a coordinate for navigation .
A point is the dominant center , as in the principle point of perspective .
A stand with a difference is the i 360 by Intelligent Touch .
The larger a television is the more energy it will consume , regardless of its energy rating .
I always start with my favourite one : " There was a young man from Australia , who painted his arse like a dahlia , tuppence a smell , went down very well , but thruppence a lick was a failure .
" A poem is a time capsule , a Tardis so much bigger on the inside than it seems on the outside .
A flashpoint is the Norfolk Broads , where the relaxing of rules protecting wildlife and places of natural beauty permits new building , to the horror of environmentalists .
A win is a win and this one gained Saints a much needed 12 points and sees the side maintain its place at the top of the table .
Mixing gas on an expedition is an arduous task in its own , but as rain continued to fall spirits were dampened further .
This oracle in an oracle is an illustration of harnessed serendipity and its application to everyday life .
" This may involve rethinking things that you thought quite clear : should " Edit " on a toolbar be a noun ( " editing " ) or a verb ( " to edit " ) ?
An exception was the smallest boat in the fleet , the Optimist , sailed by Angus Johnstone who tied in seventh place with his brother Alistair in his Laser .
The only one that really had any effect on me in that was when I was a kid was The Căluşari " the one with the possesed little boy .
For this reason a humidistat is a feature on most dehumidifiers , and its function is to provide a shut off should the humidity be reduced below a certain level .
The procedure for closing a charity is the same whether you are turning over £ 50,000 or £ 5 million .
From general conversations I 've had with various people , the biggest potential ( and I say potential , because they 're not all affected ) downfall with a coachbuilt is the risk of damp getting into the wooden frame , which is apparently a fecking nightmare to fix .
Where I live now I have no room for one , though , and I have learned that just building a greenhouse is not the same as maintaining one ... so it is best to have it done right from the start and perhaps have one built for you if you are not the construction type ( which I am most certainly not ) .
Amongst his many opinions , he believes 12 Years a Slave is not a " courageous " movie , that Jared Leto is only nominated because of the " person he 's playing , " that Woody Allen is facing a lot of " absurd bullshit , " and that American Hustle is basically the best thing ever .
A platform is not a platform .
A bookmark is not a bookmark because an e-book is not a book .
Taking apart an eyepiece is not a job for the average tools you might have for common trades and tasks .
And , judging by reports that even Java 5 support is worse on Leopard than it was on Tiger , Java as a whole is not a priority for Apple .
Therefore , you cannot create a comment by concatenating ' / ' and ' * ' : the ' / * ' sequence that starts a comment is not a lexical unit , but rather the beginning of a " long " space character .
cr-at-eol treats a carriage-return at the end of line as part of the line terminator , i.e. with it , trailing-space does not trigger if the character before such a carriage-return is not a whitespace ( not enabled by default ) .
A yoik is not a song but a resonant melodic phrase , sung unaccompanied and repeated through various iterations with no fixed beginning or end .
He pointed out , however , that the beauty of an object is not the whole story , for all beautiful objects must decay .
" If it be , " said the man , " the people are not Welsh ; a man is not a horse because he happens to be born in a stable .
If it puts your mind at rest , I suspect the speed of the response is more about meeting targets than it being anything sinister - after all a GP is not a specialist .
Things get trickier when a claim is not a word-for-word match .
Because a flame is not an object ordinarily associated with this saint , a name combining ( Saint ) Bridget + Flame is not registerable .
It is this approach which has , for example , allowed cognitive science to use computer models of cognitive processes , without having to be concerned with the obvious fact that a person is not a computer .
A nation is not a corporation and never should be .
Isolating a child is not an effective method of behaviour management , and childminders should never put a child into a room and leave them alone .
Maintaining medical staffing on a wing and a prayer is not a success at any level .
A statement is not a proper invoice .
Hence , it could be argued that a product is not a product of nature when the probability to occur in nature is minimal and it is the product of a process involving new technical steps .
To paraphrase Mao , " A revolution is not a dinner party ...
So , asking people outright in a poll is not that useful .
What matters in a gun is not the price tag but how well it shoots .
The Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals says a circus is not a suitable environment as appropriate welfare standards cannot be maintained .
But having a pseudonym is not an excuse for meanness , nor for saying things for which you 're not accountable .
A surge is not a strategy ; it 's a component of one in support of a whole government approach .
The findings of the scoping process should be formally presented in the form of a Scoping Report , with a scoping matrix , although the production of such a report is not a requirement of the EIA Regulations .
A letter is not a necessity , but it is a nice gesture and it may help you get the job .
( m ) If and when an association is not a member of a federal home loan bank , to borrow not more than an aggregate amount equal to 1 / 4 of its capital on the date of borrowing .
Someone who does n't understand why a recovering alcoholic would be grateful to be an alcoholic is not an alcoholic .
A seeblatt is not a form of armorial display , and so may be charged in a fieldless badge .
A tax is not a voluntary payment but an enforced contribution exacted pursuant to legislative authority .
Unlike a company , a partnership is not a separate legal entity , even though the number of partners may be large .
To be a refugee was not a good reason .
But a business is not a utopia , and it is not a substitute for direct connection to the people and places that make the music you love .
If you are a male nurse ( I 'm female , so it does n't apply to me ) and you want children someday , getting a vasectomny is not an option .
" There can be issues because handling a fleet is not the HR manager 's sole job but , given this is usually an organisation 's biggest expense after payroll and buildings , it must be taken seriously , " says Jenner .
He has made an offer of a forfeit .. a forfeit is not a bet ..
The Court decided in both cases that the sale of a " severable proprietorial share " in a dwelling was not a sale of the dwelling .
In the long run the lack of a tutorial was not the end of the world .
A library is not a luxury , but one of the necessaries of life .
White House spokesman Jay Carney told a press briefing that while military action is an option that remains on the table for Syria , such an intervention is not the right course of action at this point .
Reading a speech is not the recommended way to deliver a speech .
It may be that publicly dissing a recruiter is not the wisest of career moves , and maybe James will get retaliatory .
A schizoid is not a misanthrope .
Writing code is easy , but writing code which can benefit a large community or may extend its life cycle beyond a coder 's professional commitment to a project is not that easy .
I understand the instinct to explain and have undoubtedly been guilty of it in the past , but not understanding a book is not the only reason a person can have for not liking it .
Writing a novel is not a risk-free activity .
As for Benedict-XVl being a Freemason , well for me myself just like in the business world , a handshake is not a contract .
" But the results do suggest that anecdotal accounts of the accuracy of a profile are not a good basis for arguing that profiling is actually useful , he said .
It is axiomatic that G.L. c 140 , § 131 , is a regulatory statute , and that its prohibition on the issuance of a license to carry firearms to an individual who has been adjudicated a delinquent child for the commission of a felony is not a criminal penalty .
A man who seldom went to a theatre was not the best judge of the ordinary influences of a theatre ; and a man who was found more in the theatre than in a church of Christ , than in a church of any denomination , could hardly be the best judge of what went on in the Church of Christ .
But a trespasser is not a " visitor .
The philosophical notion of a person is not the commonplace usage meaning roughly ' you there ' , nor is it a noun for a strictly defined object to be treated by the methods of empirical science .
" For example ' white is not black , ' ' a circle is not a triangle , ' ' three is greater than two .
When a word is not the sum of its letters : Fingerspelling and spelling .
An interview is not a dialogue of merely an interviewer and a respondent , but must be regarded as a situated practice more broadly .
Recording light or sound ( or impressions ) from a situation is not a wholesale or total recording of that situation , or even a model of the situation .
Such a voice is not a defect of oratory ; where it exists , it is a defect of nature - still a disadvantage .
A man is not a man unless he is a thinker - he is a fool having no ideas of his own .
We agree that proof of such a motive is not a legal defense to this prosecution .
A computer is not an open system when it comes to memory .
Never mind , he had pledged his life to the Emperor , and the loss of an arm is not the ultimate sacrifice : the Emperor would still find employment for him !
Composing type and composing an essay are not that different , Senchyne said : " The idea of ' composition ' is a very interesting lens to think about our own writing and how to produce it .
Similarly , an SEP is not a canned sales-skills training course .
The notification of a seizure is not a matter for appeal .
" A draw is not a defeat .
If a person is not a medical practitioner , but is some other person responsible for treatment , will the Minister assure us that their views will be treated in good faith and on an equal basis , and that there will be no question of what may be termed professional brow beating ?
My second question relates to amendment No 45 and the issue of reporting , and what happens if a person is not a clinician but is in charge of the patient and their reporting .
I do think that quoting two locals in a bar is not a fair representation of the love and respect that the people of Wexford have for our Opera Festival .
If the owner of a restaurant is not a Muslim or the people serving were not , there would be a reluctance .
Technically buying a bluray to replace a DVD is not a total rip-off , since it should be higher quality ( if not return it ) and one has a choice .
A volley is not a type of serve .
To them a degree is not an object ; they come to the University to obtain from it the knowledge they desire and which it is the primary duty of a University to give to all comers .
Currently enjoy views of the open countryside ( right to a view is not a material consideration ) 39 .
I can see the argument that if you 're trying to re-establish yourself as a credible current record making act , possibly a mash-up is not the most credible way to relaunch yourself .
But the film 's saving grace , if we can even call it that , is the psychedelically surreal and phantasmagoric imagery , which make you wonder if a hallucinogen is not a prerequisite to decipher their meaning .
They 're not sneaking anything in or cheating anyone 3 years for $ 75 a year is not a deal-breaking price for any size developer .
Going on a diet is not the same thing as changing one 's diet , i.e. , improving one 's eating habits .
This decision to avoid the new burdens or risks created by a treatment is not the same as directly intending to end life in order to avoid the burden of living in a disabled state .
These are not conditions likely to be repeated and despite the obvious fact such a debt is not the same ( we have no war we can stop fighting ) , this still hung over the country into the 70 s .
So I 'll supprt my clubs manager , supporting a club is not a pick and mix .
The problem with these views being expressed more in a downturn is not the fault of any immigrants .
Being in a rut is not the best place to be at any time in your life so in conclusion take action today , and you will thank yourself for it later on down the line .
Simply labelling anyone that disagrees with your point of view a liar is not a very grown-up debating strategy , it just makes you sound like a petulant child .
Eyes , ears even a nose are not a part of his makeup .
Doing the minimum possible as a member is not a survival characteristic .
They 're being true to themselves , and they understand a friendship is not a credit union .
So yes , we need to plan , but the plan needs to take the form of a pliable lifejacket , not a rigid straightjacket ... another analagous description could be that a plan is not a map of the journey , but that it is a picture of how you would like the journey to progress , before taking the first step ...
Whether the ignominious death of Arius in < 343 > a boghouse was not a story feigned and put about by Athanasius above twenty years after his death ?
If there is one thing that gets my goat when I appear as a subscriber on a list is not the fact I have to unsubscribe its the fact that I had automatically been added without a thought .
A burgee is not a personal flag despite the fact that it is usually hauled down when an owner is not on board 1927 .
IMO we have had too many years where the benefits culture has grown to a level where getting a job is not an attractive proposition .
( I have to use this on my lap - sitting at a desk is not an option for me ) .
Talking with a therapist is not the same as talking with a friend , a parent or sibling , who would probably have an opinion about the issues discussed .
If so , then to call someone an idiot is not a form of criticism .
Fitting or replacing a bathroom is not a job for the feint hearted and can test the patience of even the most seasoned DIY ' er .
To say we were a business-there was not a business model .
Being a communist is not a crime .
" All too often in law school I saw fellow students discover too late that being a lawyer was not the right choice for them , " she says .
Cruelly dubbed ' Freddy Adieu ' by some , Adu has had a frustrating time since moving to Europe two years ago but , as I found out , any shortcomings he might have as a player are not the only reasons why his career has stalled .
Sequencing a genome is not an experiment , there 's no hypothesis being tested .
These issues are real , but other communities around the District offer proof that a moratorium is not the right way to address them .
" A Team is Not a Team if You Do n't Give a Damn About Each Other .
A team is not a team , if you do n't give a damn about each other ...
What moves a puppy to maturity or a fetus to an adult is not an external collection of parts or properties but rather an internal defining nature or essence .
;) I have n't used a mac so ca n't comment on usability vs windows - but a mac is not a cheap option and is unlikely to offer best value for money , unless general build quality is important to you as a Windows machine with similar build quality will have a similar price , although it 's possible to get similar specs in a lower-quality laptop at 2 / 3rds or half the cost in a Windows machine .
A foetus was not a person in any accepted sense .
But at this point in Israelite religion , belief in an afterlife was not a part of the religious imagination .
We also spoke about when a trust is not a valid trust and in particular when the claimed grantor ( the one who is allegedly conveying some form of property or right into a trust ) , does not have the authority to do what they say .
We already had long-term contact with eObjects and Kasper Sørensen in particular and in those discussions we recognized that starting a community is not the right thing but feeding and participating in such a community is what works .
A contribution is not a qualified contribution if it is subject to a condition or limitation regarding the use of the contribution .
A mark was not an actual coin , but an amount .
Designing an application is not a problem but marketing it is the challenge .
It is important to note that a committal is not an essential requirement .
( SIC ) So a crash is not a problem then Kate .
More importantly , such a forum is not the place to conveniently ignore Israel 's current and historical racism .
A toleration of a minority is not the same as equality before the law between opinions .
Such a union is not the expression of a personal , emotional or passionate relationship , but rather is connected to the social responsibility of generation and to love for the collective community .
The test may feature an intercept , although the emphasis is on the seeker experimentation and an intercept is not an objective of this flight .
If the corporation were not a separate legal person ( as , for example , in U.S. and English law a partnership is not a separate legal person from the partners who compose it ) the distribution of dividends would not a be a taxable event ( because money would not be changing hands ) .
The Bishop of Clogher Dr. d ' Arcy ) introduces another feature into the doctrine -- that the end of a desire is not an external thing , but the corresponding activity ( Short Study of Ethics , 2nd ed . , p 158 ) .
An entrant is not a winner of any prize , even if the Contest should so indicate , unless and until entrant 's eligibility has been verified and entrant has been notified that verification is complete .
That he had a career as a surgeon is not a surprise .
An actress is not a machine , but they treat you like a machine .
Aristotle sees the origin of the state differently from Plato , stating explicitly that ' a State is not a sharing of a locality for the purpose of preventing mutual harm and promoting trade .
A tolerance is not an estimate of the pesticide residue that is common or typical for a food ( see BCERF Fact Sheet # 25 on Pesticide Residue Monitoring and Food Safety for more details ) .
Because of its immobility , it was absent from the early ragtime crews that played in street parades and rode on advertising wagons ; but because a house is not a home with­out a piano , it was the first instrument available , the first studied and mastered for jazz , in thousands of houses ( many of which were also not homes ) .
Sure , for some there may be issues of " women 's liberation " , but I assure you that more and more women are realizing that raising a family is not a " waste of a life " after all , but is life .
Changing the title of a book is not a trivial matter , but we are seriously discussing creating a new book about Apple Wi-Fi networking , a book that will continue on the foundation set by this one , but that will add 10.9 Mavericks and iOS 7 information , plus any other updates that might become desirable over the next few months .
Medicating your dog is very difficult and can be dangerous -- a dog is not a human ; his or her system will often NOT react the same way to medication as a human 's .
Came off early as it was hampering his abillity to rock and he thankfully realised that pulling it over his head between songs like a hoodie was not a good idea and the Moo Moo was gone for the rest of the show .
Cant , in particular cant by our democratic politicians , is the dismal order of the day , along with the brazen policy that the response to a question is not an answer but an evasion of it by way of a prepared little speech on something else .
To revert to its activity , if an act of a self is not the result of a last condition completing a causal circumstance , why , as you might ask , does it go off ?
[ 5 ] For some quests the NPC you must return to for a reward is not the same as the one that gave you the quest .
I definitely agree that a house is not a home .
Owning a home is not a perfect answer regardless of the question ; there is no perfect answer .
But a man is not a mouse .
The same game reigns in doorframes in the dark But a classic 's not a classic that 's not older than Jurassic Park .
Because a narrative is not a fractal .
In the absence of that , this discussion is going nowhere , because a discussion is not a venomous slurry of discourteous misinformation and propaganda blurted out from someone who has been but a mere observer .
Yet it is important to keep in mind that a well-grounded , scholarly reading of a poem is not the only kind of desirable reading .
It has been argued repeatedly that our constitution is good and that our problem as a nation is not the constitution .
That 's not to say that testing the " buyability " of an offering is not a good idea , and that people who claim they want what you 're offering wo n't actually buy , just that testing is not fail proof .
But generally , it feels like 101 over and over and it 's strange because having a child is not a minority activity , many women do it , so why does so much of written word feminism fail to grasp the reality of it ?
A sword is not an attribute normally associated with a griffin .
Likewise , a hammer is not an attribute normally associated with a griffin .
A fetus is not a child nor does it have a mother or father .
A fetus is not a patient ( unless the PREGNANT human [ not a mother ] determines that it should be ) , nor is it a child , let ALONE a ' son ' or ' daughter ' , yet .
What truly defines an empire is not the glory of its ascendence , or the peak of its accomplishments , but how it behaves in its decline .
A charge is not the same as ownership .
While becoming an expert is not a prerequisite to developing programming methodologies , it does help you develop more advanced methodologies .
Ukraine knows to its own cost that winning a revolution is not the end of it , defending the results is most important .
Selecting a topic is not a very easy task .
Of course , now that I think about it , the trajectory of a relationship 's not that far removed from the trajectory of a band ; both sure as hell require work , and a fight does n't necessarily kill either one flat-out , at least not immediately .
The Egyptians have reminded the world that an election is not a blank cheque which leaves representatives free from all constraint .
If a performer is not a conduit for the spectator 's imagination of another space , the space of the represented action , then they are not an actor .
An audience is not a community - if you spend the social media budget on audience , it will not return business value - a community sticks together .
An audience is not a community !
In addition , any religion that promotes a parent abandoning a child is not a religion , or it is a religion mis-interpreted .
If an insurer is not an approved sender , it must report through an approved sender until approved by the director for direct reporting of proof of coverage via EDI .
As Ada Louise has written , " A building is not a studio work ; it is the product of an enormous mixed bag of programs and pressures that go far beyond the unified vision that is possible for the creator , performer , interpreter or translator of other art forms .
( 2 ) When the term of a loan is not the same as the term of the insurance , the policy or certificate must disclose prominently , in bold letters , the limit to the coverage .
" An entitlement is not a requirement to apply for benefits every time a patient receives a medical service .
For example , an apology is not a confession .
Moving services into a community is not a same cost option .
A man was not a leper because he had horrible ulcers and other sores on his body .
And a man is not a sinner because he sins : he sins because he is a sinner , and as such he is corrupt constitutionally .
S .55 ( 2 ) A person is not a child for the purposes of this Act if he is or has been married ...
Maybe promoting engineering as a career is not the way to attract people to engineering ...
A link to a site is not an endorsement of that site .
If he says by action that the cultural use of a drug is not an argument in Bolivia then why is the cultural use of a drug in this country alright ?
The land is currently zoned agricultural and although a snake-farm is not a specifically permitted use , it is not a prohibited use , either .
That a man must lead a prayer is not a sign of male superiority over women .
WThen we say that a man is not a gentleman , we usually mean , not to impugn his social status , but to aver that his character and conduct are unworthy of it .
A cure is not an impossible dream .
In short , such a morality is not a set of specific moral rules , but a view of morality as encounter with a transcendent personal moral will , who demands a concern for the welfare of all human beings without exception ( we might now say , of all sentient beings without exception ) , and a realisation of the personal potentialities in which human flourishing consists .
Therefore , there can be no continued existence after death , if such a state is not a continued knowledge of G-d .
A dome is not a home : MIT .
And the stream that is newly unbound after a thaw is not the same stream that runs in the middle of the summer .
a body is not an object with a concrete distinction from the mind , an object that can be separately valued and loved .
The woman I now visit several times a week is not the woman I knew five years ago , or even three years ago , when she bounded into my maternity suite with her walker , perching herself on the sofa while ordering my husband around .
When a role is not the fenestrated nail introduced into choriocarcinoma .
A resolution is not a discussion : in small groups the victory of a particular resolution is often just an accident .
An artist is not a politician .
Here 's what I 'd like you to take away from this article : getting a loan is not that easy , whether you are a wage earner or an intrepid entrepreneur .
There are several miles of track , so an encounter is not a given .
An army is not a criminal organization --- at least , it should n't be , and in a civilized nation there is a clear distinction .
" The propriety of a relationship is not the concern of our office , " Starr said in his opening statement .
Richard Avedon A portrait is not a likeness .
What interests me as a novelist is not the malevolence of man-so what else is new ?-
( b ) Where the person named in a single notice applicable to a collective work as a whole is not the owner of copyright in a separate contribution that does not bear its own notice , the case is governed by the provisions of section 405 ( a ) .
She told us , " If a man is not a provider , you cannot love him .
$ 250 for a comment is not a bad deal :) Contest ends Friday at 3 pm PST , go leave a comment / tweet now .
Finally , in July 1981 , the Comptroller published a proposed regulation formally incorporating his 1976 interpretation that an ATM is not a branch of a national bank unless the bank owns or rents it 46 Fed .
A subperson is not an inanimate object like a stone , which has ... zero moral status ...
We understand that making a claim is not a decision you 'll undertake lightly , but you can be confident that we have the necessary expertise and the comprehensive knowledge of medical negligence law to assert your right to 100 % compensation .
For instance , a pint(UK) is not the same size as a pint(US) .
remember that advice from an officer is not a decision of the Authority ; a decision can only be given after the submission and consideration of a formal application .
Publication of a submission is not an endorsement of the content of the submission .
I know not what can be said in reply to this criticism but that we have come to a fact in the nature of things : an oak is not an orange .
:wave: 4 -5 times a week is not that bad but I know some kids training 6 days a week , mornings too .
Now , a two-seater is not an appropriate car for every Tom , Dick or Harry .
The DHS investigated the Springfield incident and said the state agency 's report claiming the water pump had been damaged because of a cyber-attack was not a final conclusion and was wrong .
A brand is not the sum of all the advertising , but the complete picture of our very nature , which can be judged only by our fruits - both big and rare and small and plentiful .
It 's a bit analogous to the example quoted by Wittgenstein to explain why a word is not a fixed concept with a single thread running through it , but rather a family of usages , each related to its neighbours but not necessaarily to all of the rest .
By the way , a meteorologist is not a climate scientist .
A grandparent is not a close relative for funeral payment purposes - Reg 3 ( 1 ) SFM & FE Regs Payment should not be refused under regs 7 ( 3 ) & ( 4 ) because of the existence of a grandparent .
If a clone is not a clone , is an embryo an embryo ?
There is no legal requirement to scan ' property ' and as a microchip is not a visable mark , it does not count under property law .
A constitution is not a thing in itself that transforms a state , a constitution is simply the collection of rules about how the state is governed .
To me a house is not a home unless full of greenery and florals .
The perception of a pattern is not a rational process , it is a creative process .
In other words , an appliance is not a stripped-down computer - it is a fully functional computer with spyware on it out of the box .
Targeting the user agent of a device is not an ideal method in designing for the general mobile web , but when we need to specifically target a device , like the iPhone , Pre or Google 's Android it 's a pretty solid option .
Seeing , experiencing , being present for a phenomenon is not a benchmark for proving what really happened .
Phoebe , what you consider a sin is not the same thing as what a secular government is supposed to consider to be protected behavior .
However , a failure to see any clear alternatives to a view is not a defense of the view .
A leadership is not the people who should judge prophetic words , but the prophets who are within the congregation ( I Cor 14:29 14:29 ) .
This is true , and I am not saying that a nation who is attacked should just have their citizens stand there and be slaughtered , but what I mean is that war as a concept is not a solution to anything .
In Pitt 's own example , Galileo 's decision to investigate the heavens with a telescope was not the only investigative option open to him .
A simple retelling or narration of a story is not an acceptable substitute for hard and searching thinking about history and historical relationships .
If the flower is A , and we think that the flower is separate from the other things ( a flower is not a cloud , is not sun , is not fertiliser ) , if we see the flower that way then it is not yet a true flower .
In summary , a bodhisattva is not a legendary personality , bodhisattvas are you , you all .
Bunge states that a rule is not the subject of truth , but of effectiveness .
Proceedings connected with economic insolvency shall be considered as completed , if a debtor is not any more in the state of insolvency or if bankruptcy proceedings are initiated .
A phenomenon is not an appearance or even an apparition but a sign , a symptom which finds its meaning in an existing force .
For Deleuze-Nietzsche " a phenomenon is not an appearance ... but a sign ...
A plant or an animal is not a monad and individual in the metaphysical sense , but a combination of monads , of which one rules and the others obey .
In this piece , I aim to show why belief in a god is not a reasonable position to hold .
A party 's not a party without deviled eggs !
Also killing a fetus is not the only way to stop it , you can carry it to term and give birth , no violence involved .
Starting a business is not a walk in the park either but the secret to starting a successful one is exploring one 's passion .
For if an agent is not the cause of a form as such , neither will it be directly the cause of " being " which results from that form ; but it will be the cause of the effect , in its " becoming " only .
Committing a sin is not a quality of Ambiya .
Believe it or not , working 10 + hours a day is not that restrictive family-wise .
Including links to PDF formats exclusively on a website is not a good idea though as not everyone has a PDF reader like Adobe Acrobat .
The aeon of which our Lord was speaking was about to close in a great catastrophe ; and a catastrophe is not a protracted process , but a definitive and culminating act .
Now , not making a choice is not a choice , as not making a choice is a choice .
Lúthien is happy for others to speak Sindarin and insists that being part of a minority is not the appeal , but she says the language should only be used " in the spirit of the Elves " .
The line " My God , my God , why hast thou forsaken me " is only a phrase-Talk-it 's not the Walk .
A son is not a servant to his master but a son to his father .
A brief quotation with a translation is not a book so not a diglot .
A church is not a museum or an art gallery .
The man with a fag and a pint is not a poor boy from the slums who has ' made good ' .
This value is set when a SelectionBox is not the child of a DialogShell and it is not one of the other types of dialogs .
Graduating in a gaol was not a recommendation afterwards to profitable employment , and he became a wandering speaker on prohibited subjects of usefulness and progress .
Both men and women would say that , " mwanamke sio mvuvi , anatanda ushimba tu " ( lit : a woman is not a fisher , she just catches small shrimp ) , implying that the activity women performed in the sea environment was not really fishing 3 .
An article is not the same thing as a dissertation chapter .
2.45 Our definition of a prototype is not the only one that might be useful for analysing prediction-observation fit .
" But extracting the first two letters from each word in a series is not a productive source of English neologizing .
In my post yesterday critiquing Kevin Roberts ' coinage of sisomo ( an acronymic blend of " sight , sound , and motion " ) , I stated that " extracting the first two letters from each word in a series is not a productive source of English neologizing .
Warren concludes that " excessive political influence within an administration is not a quality that enhances a Director of Central Intelligence .
It is clear that such a contract is not a logical impossibility .
Sam was really upset and no , a hologram is not the same .
There is the misplaced confidence of the abortionist who will assure a pregnant woman that a foetus is not an unborn child .
A man is not a Jew if he is only one outwardly , nor is circumcision merely outward and physical .
Being a moderator is not an easy job - it requires tact and patience as well as the ability to anticipate problems and deal with them before they arise .
But a label is not the same thing as the concept it labels .
He also stated that the referendum on the Alternative Vote held in May was " the wrong one " , justifying its failure by saying that " people are scared off change - a referendum is not the right way " .
You could claim fuel expenses for going to friends for baths etc. Waiting a week is not a long time , as a home owner we have waited 2 weeks in the middle of winter to get Boiler repaired .
A functional model that is not in accordance with observations of the structure , dynamics , and possible use of an artefact is not a good model and must not be regarded as a valid functional description .
And a corporation is not a person , no matter what the lawyers swear .
" However , in many cases , the holder of a right is not the individual breeder of the variety but is the employer .
" I know a bull is not a cow , and Lawrence 's bull was grey and not white , but it was his sensing of the unexpected divinity of the bull that caught my attention .
At the same time , remember the point stressed above , that an evaluation is not a summary .
Ordination by bishops was thus seen to be of the esse of the church without which a church is not a church .
I am far from being sure that a man is not a gainer by suffering a moderate interruption of bodily ease for a couple of hours out the four and twenty .
Furthermore , a statement is not a " falsification " when the person making the statement honestly believes that he or she is telling the truth .
Have a look at Tripod Mounted Internet and if $ 1800 equipment cost and 60 $ a month is not a problem , this is the way to go .
Are you sure that a medic is not a doctor , and it was n't a doctor who wrote up his prescription chart ?
A hurricane is not a central planner .
Buying a window is not a creation of wealth .
' ... the trade followed by your brother of a higgler is not a very good introduction to a police force [ and he ] ... would need certificates of spotless character from the Superintendents of the Divisions in which he carried on this traffic ' .
If it 's better for him , once a day is not a problem .
People continuing to claim a theft was not a theft can check out a parallel case in the US when a employee of Deibold took embarrassing documents from his employer and was charged with several felonies : uriblank English law is no doubt similar and there is a police investigation being done into the matter .
For these reasons the view has generally been adopted that the wavefunction associated with an object is not a real " thing " , but merely represents our knowledge of the object .
( Did n't I hear that somewhere before ? ) * There is no faster way to hack off a singer than to make a differentiation between " singers " and " musicians " - implying that a singer is not a musician .
Just because a policy is not the whole answer , does not mean that it wo n't help the situation .
First a paediatricain is not a foot doctor but a child specailist .
For example if an individual is not an active member of the receiving scheme but is a deferred member ( having deferred benefits held under the scheme ) and has been a deferred member for more than 12 months before the transfer is made the transfer cannot be a block transfer .
Educating the Sales staff in how the process of payment works , the fact that a sale is not a sale until the money is in the bank , or making sure all the information for the accounts department is where it should be on the order form so that the Credit checks and contract terms are abided by is as important a part of the process as any within the company .
Fiji as a whole is not that dangerous a place to visit , the main problem is with regard to two areas , the island of Viti Levu as well as the capital Suva .
" Throwing light is a metaphor : there is no actual light , and a question is not the sort of thing that can be lit up .
[ 13 ] While a fetus is not a " person , " it is not a nonentity .
Certainly , there is a philosophical background to Aquinas 's arguments just as there is a background to everything we say here : the mere existence of such a background is not a refutation of Aquinas 's position but merely indicates the need for further intellectual exploration .
Providing a preview is not a problem in and of itself , as long as the author knows and understands that the content will be used in multiple contexts , where it will look different .
" The killing of a human is not the defense of a doctrine .
Venus can not see the lot through the glare but technically would not need to because a co-presence is not an " aspect " where the power of sight is involved .
Alexander 's written works , whether sermon or other composition , read well , he believed that a sermon was not a sermon , in the fullest sense of the word , unless the uniqueness and holiness of the worship situation were recognized ; the sermon is the sum of all its parts , the words , their delivery , the place , and he must ground his proclamation on the rock of doctrinal accuracy .
And all because , the author asserts , a denomination is not a true church at all .
An iNAV is not an indication of the price at which ETF shares can be created or redeemed but it does provide a good indication to secondary market traders of the value of the ETF 's portfolio .
For example , a jaguar is not a leopard .
Violent crime in Italy is very low , so , as opposed to America , being lost in a city is not a threat to life or limb .
In analyzing the data , though , it turned out that what was most often purchased with a stapler was not a staple remover , but rather a ruler , tape dispenser , and a wastepaper basket-items that indicate a purchase for a new employee .
Jessie Thompson is a professional photographer and mother of three who loves her children but admits being a parent is not all smiles and sunshine .
Re : Podcasting in general : I 'd also ask that people keep in mind that a podcast is not a scripted show , or editorial column or straight review .
The court determined that a contract under which a worker was supplied to a company as a contractor was not a sham designed to avoid any employment relationship .
its nice when people realise that being a mechanic is not a piece of pi * * all the time !!
expousure due to a solvent was not the method intended .
Once they left , flight 's motion got to Pranav and a closed cabin of a flight is not a great place to throw up .
The concept of having a personal stake in the outcome of elections to be a citizen is not a bad one .
An acorn is not an oak tree : a lump of iron ore is not a sword .
A woman is not some " baby machine " that is to crank out one baby after another because she made the mistake of sleeping with some idiot !
Leasing also provides an alternative when buying a car is not an option You may be able to take out a small loan from your credit union or a small loan company .
I wonder how many people here then wonder , why bother with your comments when you will be six foot under without having made 0.1 % profit on your investment , because a profit is not a profit until you have taken it .
Expectant parents shopping for a home are not the only ones is a personal finance reporter with the times .
If we send out the message that having a device fitted to the front of a car is not a way around the law , the number of speed-related crashes may be reduced .
In NM , refusal to sign a citation is not a crime .
" In NM , refusal to sign a citation is not a crime .
If not being able to visit a branch is not an issue an online conveyancer maybe an option worth considering .
A fetus is not a child 4 .
Agree with me , or your an idiot is not a good way to spread your message .
But many others would feel that in fact a meeting is not the best place or means for problem-solving and decision-making .
> > > Standard checks , after all an average plod is n't going to know a bloke with a camera is not a terrorist , taking techncial shots .
Surely no greater honour could be sought by a Glasgow man than to become first Chancellor of a university in his native city and yet in a sense were not a new university we are infact inheritors of a long tradition we must live by our ability to sell the good we produce in the fiercely competitive world of international trade .
" Being handed a medal is not the way anybody would like to win a medal .
Even a person is not a shaman he composed songs .
But strafing a building is not a particularly effective way to rescue children who are thought to be in danger .
He said : " But the Games are not an easy target and the fact that we have disrupted multiple terrorist plots here and abroad in recent years demonstrates that the UK as a whole is not an easy target for terrorism .
Inherent subjectivity of a medium is not the same as deliberate manipulation of a photo .
Rather than rely on propaganda we follow Frankel 's lead and insist that a bank is not a commons ; we seek the definite social arrangements that will keep it from becoming a commons .
Whether or not to outsource a function is not an institution 's most important question .
Heydon J says ( at para 353 ) that ' a child is not an object for the gratification of its parents , like a pet or an antique car or a new dress ' - which is indisputable .
After all , that an acorn is not an oak tree and a block of bronze is not a sculpture are merely platitudes .
A human being trying to live an entire lifetime without a spouse is not the plan God had in mind for most people from the beginning .
As you know , anyone who earns more than £ 59 a week-which is not a film-star salary-does not get council tax benefit .
A fund is not a bond .
When a Biography Is Not a Biography : The Blue Hour : A Life of Jean Rhys The new biography of Jean Rhys goes too far , argues Lauren Elkin ...
" A glossary is not a law , " said the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities ' Judy Solomon .
' To change a country is not an easy thing .
Though in all fairness , it 's a VERY safe assumption in general that someone using a crack is not a paying customer .
The eurozone crisis : a crisis that can be resolved at the stroke of a pen is not a crisis .
A landlord is not an employer and the rights granted are vastly different , however , landlords can , with notice , ( depending on the state and local ordinances ) evict without cause if they give proper notice .
( A hangover is not a serious injury .
Dale ( 1914 ) commented , with reference to Highcliffe , that : " The estimate that the sea takes on average from the land a yard [ approx 1 metre ] a year is not an exaggeration .
Gertrude Stein notwithstanding , a rose is a rose is not a Snottgobble .
It 's not an ideal solution , but is better than nothing if a generator is not an option .
While a pen is not the ideal place , it is better than where this dog was and where he was going .
A degree is not a measurement .
Starting a brand is not a difficult task , but making it impactful can be a tough job .
Please remember adopting a puppy is not the time to be shopping for a bargain .
A house is not a home without a dog .
Remember that an accountant is not a bookkeeper .
Distinguishing between vehicle and process theories , he adopts the latter : " what 's important about a neuron is not the chemicals it secretes or the electrical potentials it generates , but the content of the information encoded in those physical media " ( p 37 ) .
His lawyers have indeed made a point of arguing that making a video is not a war crime , and that the conviction of al-Bahlul could have a chilling effect on the freedom of speech of any non-American - myself , for example .
put the remap back on my car today and soon realised my car is now useless , cold wet roads over 300 Brake in a FWD is not a good mix .
Admittedly a fridge is not the best testing environment , so another option would be to try a few different rental models during your ski holiday .
Pitching a baseball is not the same as throwing one .
All of a sudden work or time or a ride was not a factor in them getting there .
Since a person is not a ' thing ' a Population Demon is not a person , although people can be and usually are , in thrall to ( in the hands of ) many such Demons .
Thus , to anyone who knows that an angel is not a body , it is self-evident that an angel is not circumscriptively present in a place ; yet that is not at all self-evident to the uneducated , who do not understand .
In other cases , we at least know that the meaning of a text is not the same as the author 's intentions , but is mediated by the history of interpretation of that text .
An event is not an action unless it is imputable to an agent who has a durable identity .
" Technology is " the study of techniques in applied engineering " , but it is commonly used by bureaucrats , the press , and others to mean " techniques " or " devices " -- computer science is a technology but a computer is not a technology -- genetic engineering is a technology but genetically-engineered corn is not a technology !
" In scientific terms ( physics ) such an action is not a " rate " , and " dose " is an appropriate expression .
Aliens : In a multidimensional picture of the basic particles , what you call an atom is not a whole particle .
How is it you determine that a farmer is not an " honest hardworking " person .
On the other hand , the killing of a child by a mother is not an uncommon happening and as is evidenced by the provision in some jurisdictions for the offence of infanticide .
Being against a thing is not the same as standing for something .
One of the problems with digital manuals for other consoles is that you can only read them on the TV , and reading text on a TV is not that pleasant an experience .
Being a teacher is not that difficult , but being a good teacher is a very different story .
I 'm sure our country will crash and burn if a man is not the next President .
" To break a tradition is not an easy task .
A critique is not a matter of saying that things are not right as they are .
A casual conversation on a date is not a formal , legalistic setting at all .
Using a microwave is not a good idea because it alters molecular structure of food molecules , An interesting experiment is to take two healthy pl ant.s of same variety Microwave some water and bring to room temperature .
If a doctor discovers that a child is not the offspring of the husband , I think he has an ethical duty to disclose such information to the husband .
An internet ' acronym ' like the ones above unpacks into an entire phrase or sentence , and is completely obscure until you are told what it means ( or can sometimes work it out from context ) Although an acronym is not an acronym unless you can say it .
May I just point out , having been a legal conveyancing secretary for 15 years , a search is not the same as a survey .
Originally posted by Strix I know a bloke who 's done it ;) A miscarriage is not the same as an abortion :rant: Essentially it is tho .
attending different colleges and being seperated for weeks at a time is not a barrier for their musical collaborations .
An affair is not the answer because someone is bound to get hurt .
Redecorating , restyling and declaring " oh darling " a lot was not the interest of these people ...
A title is not a mandatory document required to be surrendered to facilitate the affixation process .
If the class file associated with a file is not a test case , it is ignored .
Yes , except that a trial is not the same as poker .
By this method of management we get a maximum of flamingos hatched , but in many cases the pair who rear a chick are not the real parents .
As any father knows , saying no to a daughter is not an option and so , for the past few weeks , I have been dutifully rubbing in the cold white goop .
but , being able to hire a vehicle is not an automatic right , is it ?
First , a bombing is not an outright invasion .
( f ) The filing of a criminal action against a person is not a prerequisite to the bringing of a civil action under this section against such person .
However , keep in mind that all they have is the IP address and that " naming " someone on a subpoena is not the same as gaining a conviction .
" I have a brother who is a doctor in the US so I just thought of " educating " those who heard that short snippet that a diploma is not the only means to practice medicine in the states .
Getting a contract is not an easy task but I was being offered one on a plate .
Learning in an organisation is not a process of introversion , it is combining the new in a creative way with the old .
Making a determination about participating in a lawsuit is not a quasi-judicial process .
Under that statute the purchase or sale of services by an agency is not an administrative action .
- this was a very common way to invoke JavaScript functionality , most of the time when a button was not an option ( you cannot style buttons in older browsers ) .
Indeed they do , but the ethnicity of a member is not a condition of membership , nor is it any of our business .
An inquest is not a trial - it is not the role of the Coroner to decide any question of criminal or civil liability or to apportion guilt or attribute blame .
The subjective opinion of an individual is not an acceptable form of measurement .
In his famous " cold porridge " speech Alan Turing ( 1912 -1954 ) , the English mathematician and computer pioneer , argued that what defined a computer was not the medium of its physical implementation but the logical rules by which it operated .
" keep in mind that if you 're presenting Unique Cookie counts to management as if they accurately represent real people today you are being purposefully misleading and non-transparent and so perhaps providing a range and an explanation is not a bad alternative ?
Of course such a request is not the same as a notice under section 37 ( 1 ) of the Education Act 1944 and the parents will be under no duty to comply .
Knowledge of the purpose of a document is not an element required to be proved .
I entered the journalistic juggernaut of the Deadline Day Live blog from August , a breakfast to Big Ben bongs 15 hour spectacular updated every half-hour or so to highlight that a blog was not a single set-piece text but a living , developing entity , a fluid conversation that can be reshaped on the hoof , that can reflect the changing events and moods and the momentum of the story .
Travel The house is just over 10 miles from Plymouth and if you like walking or cycling then a car is not a necessity .
There is a sort of theme tune for Geoff that I found well expressed by Oscar Hammerstein II : " A bell 's not a bell ' til you ring it ; a song 's not a song ' til you sing it , Love in your heart was n't put there to stay ; Love is n't love ' til you give it away !
WE CAN ALL ACHIEVE the easy form of criticism which consists in proclaiming that if a man was not this , at any rate that ; but in truth Trollope deserves a more cordial tribute than these hedging attempts at valuation , and his novels are much more than a " very instructive document , " as Leslie Stephen loftily terms them .
Just as a crucifix is not a portrait of Jesus as he was on earth but a symbol of the Saviour as he is to us now , so the Gospels are not a simple biopic but writings that present the story of Jesus in such a way as to make plain what , crucified and risen , he means to the Christian community and for the whole world .
For many people buying a home is not a feasible option , and a quantity of good-quality social housing will always be required .
A poet is not a special case deserved of additional sympathy because their talent happens to be poetry .
All kittens are cute but they are a huge commitment and buying one on a whim because you have seen it in a shop is not the way to do it .
Missing Sunday Mass once in a while is not a problem .
A topic is not a domain with edges .
A distance of 45 km to a school is not an ideal situation .
" Phil had a Trans Am and I had a Camero and we raced over Lauren Canyon - two drunks in a contest was not a good idea !
Padian , K. ( 1998 ) When is a bird is not a bird ?
A church is not a castle .
Consider , now , the truths holding of such basic institutional concepts , including negative truths such as a context is not a waiving of a claim ; a relation of authority is not a preference ; sincerity is not obligation , and so on .
Does this mean that a child is not a gift ?
Buying a snake is not the same as knowing how to care for it properly .
Thus the fact that one shareholder controls all or virtually all the shares in a company is not a sufficient reason for ignoring the legal personality of the company .
He therefore adopts the view that such a sale is not a dealing by the adult and will not require to see any Matrimonial Homes Act evidence for such transactions .
We made the most of that good fortune , but qualifying for Europe two years in a row was not a reflection on how the club was progressing , only league form does that .
Nevertheless , referring to such a distinction is not a practical consideration in formulating a general description of identity fraud .
Held : The mere intention to set up a competing business whilst employed as a director was not a breach of fiduciary duty , and nor did he have a duty to disclose that intention .
Sadly she is destined to remain in this spot for some time yet , as a sale is not an option .
Technically , double ' l ' is voiceless ; rest assured , ' Ll ' at the start of a word is not a typo .
" Now , the purpose of involuntary hospitalization is treatment and not mere custodial care or punishment if a patient is not a danger to himself or others .
For Leibniz , the location of an object is not a property of an independent space , but a property of the located object itself ( and also of every other object relative to it ) .
Just as a paintbrush is not a single point , a brush image need not be a single pixel .
An atl-atl is not a spear and it does n't throw a spear .
@ FeministGriote says often that being an ally is not an identity , it is a process .
A job is not the only reason for an education ; however , that said there probably is too much emphasis on college education and not enough on vocational education in this country .
The sad truth is that having the state as a parent is not a great start in life .
I have n't received an answer yet - which is quite normal , you will say ( a fortnight is not that much ) : but I find it very difficult this time to sit and wait .
Such language is seriously misleading , since a system is not a container in any literal sense .
It is important to understand that an appeal is not a new trial and does not include new information about your case .
So being an atheist is not a guarantee that a person will be moral or develop their moral reasoning .
Still , despite the fact that it clearly has to do something with abstraction , an activity of the mind , Abelard insists that a status is not a concept of our mind .
The casting may be the same , but a casting is not a reading .
Refusing to hear a case is not the same as ruling on it .
" An exhibition is not an event , or spectacle , or something you live with .
In the republics of ancient Greece and Rome , during the whole period of their existence , and under the feudal governments for a considerable time after their first establishment , the trade of a soldier was not a separate , distinct trade , which constituted the sole or principal occupation of a particular class of citizens .
A troll is a troll is not a troll for everyone .
A lady is not a lady without having Marc Jacobs Bag .
Deleuze clarifies this : being a woman is not a given by nature , women have their own becomings-woman ; and so , if women have a becoming-woman , men have a becoming-woman as well .
It 's also important to remember , for the people accusing you of " stealing " , a cat is not an object like a car !
Being a child is not that good either ...
A migrant is not a revolutionary because of him or her having this status , but if he or she radically refuses to accept the present conditions of society with all its power structures and wants to fight them - which apply to us and all other people as well .
Following a diet is not a matter for blind faith .
A threshold is not a joint , a joint draws thresholds towards it .
OK , so firstly I want to start off by saying that running a restaurant is not the dream most people hope it will be .
So anyone who is n't ( or has never been ) a junkie is not a real person in your opinion ?
Originally posted by PerlOfWisdom So anyone who is n't ( or has never been ) a junkie is not a real person in your opinion ?
Irie brother , the way Iman see it : Haile Selassie is not Jah , just like an apple is not an apple tree .
I always say something like , a turtle is a turtle , a turtle is not a moose , and therefore , were it capable of wanting to , could never truly know what it 's like to be a moose .
If I may : A soldier is not a free man .
A prisoner is not the same as a military person following commands .
Changing the culture of a program is not an overnight process , and Summitt knows that .
A prayer is not a request .
They must state that an opening is not the result of a strike or a walkout , and that current employees have been told that a foreign worker is being sought .
Treatment of a symptom is not a prevention of the disease !
Only that an iphone is not a camera .
To be clear , a meltdown is not an Apocalyptic Nightmare Scenario : the entire plant is designed such that when everything else fails , the worst thing that happens is somebody gets a cleanup bill with a whole lot of zeroes in it .
" To be clear , a meltdown is not an Apocalyptic Nightmare Scenario : the entire plant is designed such that when everything else fails , the worst thing that happens is somebody gets a cleanup bill with a whole lot of zeroes in it .
Keeping a room for visitors or a career is not an unreasonable expectation .
Now a mediator is not a mediator of one .
Paul says : " A mediator is not a mediator of one .
Of this better Mediator Paul says : " A mediator is not a mediator of one .
A market for a platform is not the same as an ecosystem for it , which is much larger in that it includes the cost of people and third-party software and services for the code that runs atop the platform .
The following extract is from a broader expansion of the defining comments given above : In Usenet usage , a troll is not a grumpy monster that lives beneath a bridge accosting passers-by , but rather a provocative posting to a newsgroup intended to produce a large volume of frivolous responses .
But a hero is not a person who suffers .
They said that non-visible radiation emanating from a home is not the same as , say , leaving a window open , and that a reasonable expectation of privacy existed for such radiation .
I think the big thing with Cloud Computing , which helps differentiate it from the ASP model , is that the environment is dynamic , meaning that a server is not a SAP server or an Exchange server or a SharePoint server .
A novel is not a physical object , and as odd as this might sound , ebooks are well-suited to a digital form .
" I mean , in my view , a corporation is not a person .
Pointing to a pair is not the same as describing their differences .
Forming such an entity is not a viable business purpose .
Now , even if we restrict our attention to metaphorical sentences , we have to concede that the literal falsehood of a sentence is not a necessary condition of its meaning being metaphorical .
My barn is open and the TB lives next to her so not giving a feed is not an option !
A writer is not some student who performs well or ill on an exam .
Creating a replica is not a backup solution .
Judging the accurate size of an athletic shoe for a grown-up is not the matter of concern as their feet do not expand but for kids , you need to judge the correct sports-specific shoe along with the correct size as their feet are still growing .
' a lie is not the truth unless you can prove it ' as was incorporated into some lyrics of old Belief v lie - where does the belief come from if you dont have the factual evidence to support that belief or any witness / s to the facts ?
Contrary to LDS teaching , a feeling is not a sufficient basis for concluding that an experience or idea really comes from the Holy Spirit .
I think the probability of a war is not that much and even in case of an Israeli attack , our nuclear program would not damage much and in fact we gain a lot ( being the victim , oil price , captured pilots , ... ) so we are not desperately looking for negotiations .
An auditor is not a " public appointment " in the relevant sense .
" As far as I know , being a journalist is not a crime under America law .
A baby is not the worst thing that could ever happen to a rape victim - an abortion is , " explains Kiessling .
Being a writer is not an easy job , but neither is it a Herculean task .
Note to Yes on Prop h 8 ers , depriving your kids of an education is not the answer to The Marriage Crisis you have brought upon us all .
But a thing is not an object .
The use of a vehicle as a weapon is not a new concept .
Still , struggling to overtake a PM who could n't win a majority is not a benchmark of success - Ed 's polling needs to improve , which would in turn harden Labour 's lead .
USCIS claims basically that a widow is not a wife , and that if the widow did not complete the process to become a U.S. resident while her husband was alive , she cannot remain in the country .
A comma is not a strong enough punctuation mark to separate the two independent clauses by itself ; thus , using it causes the clauses to be spliced together .
Former President George W. Bush , a devout Christian , did deliver a message to the world that Islam as a religion was not the target and he visited a mosque in a symbolic gesture that encouraged the public to adopt a more positive view of Islam .
Ordinary Joe Some people will argue self-responsibility , live within your means Joe , owning a house is not a divine right after all !
Many people would like to be slaves of lust , but being a slave is not an intelligent way to live .
" An L.A. Times reporter adds : " An election is not a matter of who has the best ideas Þ. What it really comes down to is who can win the most votes .
A woman was not a legal person ( except for purposes of public punishment ) .
And while putting on a t-shirt is not an adaptation , having the smarts to recognize that it 's hot out and to figure out what to do about it is an important human adaptation .
A womb is not a roomy piece of real estate .
Theoretical sympathy expressed in a survey is not the same thing as active support or a wish to emulate the ' martyrs ' in person , of course .
The gallery app for example is a bit more complex than one would expect -- finding how to delete a picture is not a straight forward process .
I know that just two months after having a baby is not a time to get overly stressed about why our life does n't look like I want it to .
Important Quiditch match without a concussion is not an Important match !
A paradigm is not a theory .
A pool sitting directly over a reactor is not a good place to store spent fuel .
An oracle is not the source , its a voice for the source perhaps , not the source itself .
The Append * methods of curve objects now raise a TypeError exception when the first segment appended to a curve is not a line segment .
Being an actor is not a consistent job ; at least , you are n't always filming or on stage .
In my opinion - and experience - a map is not that reliable ... even in " advanced " countries .
We all know that a pop singer is not yet a star until featured on a magazine cover and spoofed in The Simpsons or South Park ; similarly , an author is not a classic until movie adaptations come along .
But a dream is not incompatible with salt ; the concept of a comma is not the enemy of oxygen ; and belief in the existence of souls neither requires nor justifies your letting your own child die slowly and horribly from a condition that medicine can easily cure .
A to Z , Home 's Cool , Being a kid is not a crime .
It has not yet been fully accepted in India that in today 's world assessing military threats to a nation is not the best way of planning for national security .
We know what you believe but a belief is not the truth unless it can be convincingly verified by evidence .
The new grammar : A flight attendant is not a stewardess A fire is not a paring knife to remove a person 's skin just so .
An airplane is not a yo-yo .
A subway is not a chute to hell .
I responded that at his age most of his ideas deserved to be thrown in the garbage , and the product of an education is not a specific idea , but rather the whole of the person being educated .
It always pays to remember that the Nash criterion for an equilibrium is not that strong , and even dominant strategy arguments are n't as soundly based in the fundamental concept of rationality as I 'd like them to be .
The environment updates on next boot , but requiring a reboot is not an option .
A disagreement is not an attack .
By this definition , a de facto standard established by one company or an exclusive group of companies or by a government is not an open standard , even if it is published and available for use by anyone at no charge .
However , where HMRC finds a manager of a charity is not a fit and proper person , a charity will not necessarily lose entitlement to the charity tax relief as HMRC can treat a charity as having met the management condition in certain circumstances .
Is the artist a liar , or simply one for whom even a fact is not a fact ?
However , most interesting in a circuit is not the circuit itself , but its philosophy , the required goal and the means by which you try to reach it .
Of course , a subject is not the same as a genre , and publishers are loath to comment on " autistic bandwaggonism " .
In my late 30 s , after a series of operations to try to rectify what doctors thought might be the reason I had n't got pregnant after a decade of trying , I had to face the harsh reality that being a mother was not a God-given right .
Being without a child is not an illness and it never has been .
We know that reviewing such a volume is not an easy task , so we are both pleased to have an opportunity to respond to Dennis Gilbert 's review and reluctant to be too censorious about what we perceive as misapprehensions on his part .
the motor mount that will need a change is not the tranny mount , but the one on the passenger side .
But a historian is not a novelist , and arguably only a novelist ( or a poet ) can represent the unrepresentable trauma of the middle passage .
' Commenting on Nick Clegg 's speech , Family Action Chief Executive Helen Dent said : ' A coalition is not an excuse for a lack of joined up government .
Although registering a mark is not a mandatory requirement , common law rights are limited to your past use .
Believing by accepting historical facts or by accepting what you have heard from people around you since you were a kid is not the " Believe " that the Bible is talking about .
Now , aside from the fact that a painting is not a " moment , " this claustrophobic , over-detailed work with its dozens of typecast men , women , and children milling about in their native costumes seems unrelated to the words or meaning of the Golden Rule which are inscribed across its surface .
Perhaps he envisaged the Radio 4 Just a Minuteteam attempting to talk about Humanism for one minute without hesitation , repetition or deviation , and it may be true that a comedian was not the most obvious choice , but the trustees were unanimous in approving Linda as the BHA 's President , and delighted when she accepted the role .
This might rule out communitarianism and " self-interest above all " accounts , but I think it 's perfectly compatible with a deontological account and also with virtue ethics , so long ( again ) as what counts as a virtue is not a matter of provincial prejudice , etc. .
The issue of internationalization of Information Architecture as a discipline and a profession is not the same in all parts of the world .
But an explanation is not an excuse , and it does n't mean we should like either inequality .
" Making a major commitment such as owning a puppy is not an easy decision .
Being a soldier is not a game .
[ Footnote 13 ] No Member of this Court has ever questioned the holding in Roe , 410 U.S. , at 156 -159 , that a fetus is not a " person " within the meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment .
Yelling " Fire " in a theatre is not an opinion .
bit vague really and yes a horse is not a machine , they are all unpredictable as all animals so yes sometimes they get a bit out of control .
And so also ( though Spicer and Bousseba for some reason avoid this information ) , is the fact that one of the presuppositions of the FoNLP goes as follows : A map is not the territory it represents , but , if correct , it has a similar structure to the territory , which accounts for it 's usefulness ( A .
But she had learned that a blade was not the only weapon , and surrendered hers without a word .
Fucking over a copper is not a good idea because it 's one of their own , is n't it , and they 'll not let that rest .
Such a particle is not an ' object ' in the sense we usually imagine , I think it is more accurately described as a ' possibility ' .
A clump is not a set , since it 's elements are ordered : it is an ordered set , but that name is too clumsy .
A hospital is not a place devoted only to the cure of disease .
A work of art is any human work whose meaning is not immediate ( a landscape is not a work of art , but a picture of a landscape is ) , you need a cultural interpretation .
Please note that someone winning a large number of games in a row is not a conclusive evidence of cheating as it often happens when a strong player chooses their opponents to be mostly lower-rated , which is technically not against the rules , and it is relatively easy to achieve for a higher-rated player .
Lying on behalf of a relative is not an offence under German law .
( 3 ) A debt is not a qualifying debt to the extent that it is secured .
We 've got to stand up to the New Agers who believe that a terrorist is not a terrorist .
Then he phoned his superior and got his answer : " A camp is not a synagogue .
A virus is not a cell .
However , a party is not a party just because it is called a party .
Now the Global Change Game is not the world stage , university students are not world leaders , and starting a nuclear holocaust in a gymnasium is not the same thing as launching real missiles from Siberia and North Dakota .
If a person 's not a mandatory reporter , Scott said he would normally screen a case to see if it fits child endangerment or aiding and abetting child abuse .
A miracle is not an explanation of what we cannot comprehend .
The concept of the divinity of a ruler was not a new concept .
An Apprenticeship is not a qualification in itself , but a number of separately certified qualifications and courses known as a Framework .
If you go to the big mosques , such as Regents Park Mosque , you will observe a simple truth : to be a Muslim is not a racial classification .
Thus , it follows that the account of an experiment is not the experiment itself .
A lie is not a lie ?
But unquestioning obedience to a command is not a common trait in Americans .
The difference with Frege ( one denotation for an expression , instead of infinitely many ) was possible due to two novelties ( see Montague 1970 a , 217 -218 ) : ' descriptive phrases do not denote individuals ' , and ' the denotation of a sentence is not a truth value , but a proposition ' .
[ 3.263 ] To understand a name and to understand a proposition are not the same .
By the fact of authorship , they remain in control of both spaces and as the novel demonstrates the dominant signifiers of Rhodesia as a whole are not those which signify the atavistic but instead the police and law-courts .
A tornado is not a fire and , therefore , that loss would not be covered .
An specialization is not an appropriate way to provide the functionality .
Creating a dependency is not the way to address deficiencies .
options for those students for whom learning a task is not a possible goal ( as described in Wallace , Larsen , & Elksnin , 1992 , p 14 ) .
If a proposal is not a Thesis Proposal , but a graduate student is the principal investigator or is to be primarily responsible for the observing , the student 's faculty advisor must complete the Thesis Student Information Form stating that the student has the requisite experience and competence to carry out the observations .
To claim one did wrong for a friend is not an excuse , for true friendship comes from a mutual belief in each other 's goodness .
We are based in Faversham but work anywhere in the county of Kent so travelling for a job is not a problem , and pride ourselves on helping customers as quickly and efficiently as we can .
Naming an estate is not a generally recommended strategy .
A track is not a building , it is a repair and upkeep issue .
As I posted below , the love that sustains a marriage is not the romance one falls in and out of however exciting that is , but its an unconditional decision to love .
The road traffic law Cleary states that no one other than authorised authorities may use blue lights , and that a lamp is not a lamp if covered - except if it is blue !
When I look back at what people have said here , the one who suggested you dared to leave your husband also suggested that an affair was not the answer , yet I do n't hear you saying you 've lost touch with the married man you were seeing .
A catcall is not a harmless inquiry or flirting technique , it 's a directive and command about a woman 's body that a man feels entitled to make .
After all , a playwright is not a Rastignac nor a Rhetore --- ' " Du Bruel looked ghastly at this .
A man is not a diplomate with impunity : the / sposo / was as secret as the grave -- so secret that the merchants of Genoa chose to regard the young Consul 's attitude as premeditated , and the heiress might perhaps have slipped through his fingers if he had not played his part of a love-sick / malade imaginaire / .
Ringworm A ringworm is not a worm but an infectious infection caused by a type of fungus that thrives in the upper layers of the skin , nails or hair .
" A library is not an obsolete dinosaur .
A library is not an obsolete dinosaur , it is not a pointless financial drain on the Government , it is a resource that allows people to learn , to grow , to visit books and each other in a safe , clean environment .
Tweets that mention " A library is not an obsolete dinosaur .
Gary said : VoicesForTheLibrary : " A library is not an obsolete dinosaur .
" - ( A dragon is not a slave . ) Daenerys Targaryen to Kraznys mo Nakloz , much to the shock of the latter .
Hopefully a message from a stranger is not the equivalent of spam .
( As the song says , ' That 's entertainment . ' ) The choice of No Name as a title is not a confession of creative failure on the part of its author but a bald statement of Victorian fact : the novel works out the social and financial consequences for two gently nurtured girls whose illegitimacy comes to light when their father dies .
The target in a charge is not the enemy 's line , it is rather his rear area .
Some feel that being a politician is not a good way to raise a family .
Becoming a muslim is not a conversion , it is a perversion .
That 's about as correct as assuming that you do n't need to know anything about how cars work to own and operate a vehicle ; were you to try driving your car across a lake , you 'd soon discover that a little theoretical knowledge ( that a car is not a boat , for example ) is a good thing , and that much of what we do is informed by theory , even when we we 're not aware of the theory .
a mouse is not a proxy for a finger .
The short version is that a mouse is not a proxy for a finger .
Allowing something into a marketplace is not the same thing as endorsing its contents .
A king is not an under judge : he is not a lord of council and session formally , because he is more .
- The antecedent is false ; the last voter in a senate is not the sole judge , else why should others give suffrages with him ?
Raising a child is not a job , that i why you dont get paid for it ...
" Undertaking a PhD is not a solitary activity , it 's a team event , and I am privileged to have met and worked with some extremely talented people while having fun in the process , " added Derek .
Nigel told us about how the birth of a horse is not an easy matter as horses have such a low pain threshold .
Do your kids think a birthday is not a birthday unless there is some semblance of a cake or cupcakes ?
" Short-course " ART to prevent infection of a newborn is not the best choice for the mother 's health .
( a ) A subject is not a substance .
( d ) A subject is not an invariant of presentation .
If a person who sells their intellectual labour by the hour for a profit is not a form of business then what is ?
We all know that every house in a street is not the same ; every vendor is not the same .
Be aware of working overtime as the stamina of a child is not the same as that for an adult .
A mediator is not a mediator of one ; But God is one .
" You were going rather too far , dear M. Derville , " said the Vicomtesse , " an attorney is not a mother of daughters nor yet a preacher .
But they ca n't do that , because a plane is not a helicopter .
You have money of your own and a motor-boat is not a bad investment .
Extending global life to 100 as a blanket is not a win .
And a zebra is not a short-version striped horse-like animal .
A cell is not a thing that a body has but is an activity that is constantly producing itself across time .
However , in point three you state : " A cell is not a thing that a body * has * but is an activity that is constantly producing itself across time .
Providing a question is not an answer to the question .
Visiting a friend is not a legitimate reason .
An assertion is not an argument .
But a book is not the ideal form for such a diverse collection .
But a process is not a person , nor is a process model .
Whether George W. Bush is or was an alcoholic is not the point here .
While developing policies and regulations for a trail is not a fun task , it will become a necessity in time with any successful trail project .
Complaining on a forum , in a taxi or over a pint is not the same .
A wave is not the same as a tsunami , no matter what the height .
Needless to say the etch a sketch was not a vision of the future but a harmless toy for aspiring talentless cartoonists .
RFS have adopted the slogan " planning to make a plan is not a plan " and Govts should follow suit .
For an OO developer , an object is not a thing .
If you are under attack from analysis objects , just quote the design creed of the bottom-up manifesto : ' a class is an abstraction ; an object is not a thing .
And of course charging up at a hundred miles an hour is not a polite hello !
The general rule in section 16 ( 2 ) TCGA 1992 that where a gain is not a chargeable gain a loss is not an allowable loss applies ( see CG 15800 ) .
Personally , I feel that a nation is not a market but a society .
Sadly , it seems the ones that have a voice are not the ones that work quietly behind the scenes to find solutions to our problems , but those that seize the opportunity to achieve personal goals .
This expression implies that an organism is not a mere algebraic sum of its parts , but is more than that , and must be treated as an integrated whole .
For example , the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit relied on the Dost factors in determining that a photograph of a naked girl on a beach was not a lascivious exhibition , Amirault , supra , and the Supreme Judicial Court relied on them in determining that a photograph that revealed a fifteen year old girl 's breast did not establish the photographer 's " lascivious intent .
ReThinking a Lot is not a typological survey ( see instead Mark Childs 's Parking Spaces : A Design , Implementation and Use Manual for Architects , Planners and Engineers ) , nor a compendium of best practices .
The only reason why people in deserts wear black is because they themselves are a heatsource as well ... whereas a camera is not a warm sweating human body that needs to cool its self .
However , the concept of a quale is not the concept of that property , but rather the concept of the place it occupies .
Elated by the omen , and finding the auspices favourable , he summoned a meeting of the troops and laid before them the measures his knowledge had suggested and the points likely to be of service in the coming struggle : - " A plain was not the only battle-field favourable to a Roman soldier : if he used judgment , woods and glades were equally suitable .
But your " analysis " is about our intent , and a reprint is not a new publication .
A tsunami is not a wave in the classical sense , but a raging torrent of water that surges inland with enormous power - much more power than a surfer can handle .
You may also reduce the list if you know a challenge is not an issue locally .
avoid " hard " negotiating ( eg " A lie is not a lie if the truth is not expected " . ) It does not build trust or relationships .
The important point here is that " trying " to make a copy is not the same thing as actually having succeeded in making a copy .
Caramel apple flavor in a coffee is not a bad idea , and for those of you curious as to just how it will play out , I would equate this coffee to a spicy , peppermint blend you would find around the winter season .
Also " Toning down " a character is not the same as wholesale changing his motivations .
Shelter volunteers do their best to make you comfortable , but a shelter is not a very comfortable place .
" A caricature is not a description , and yet it may indicate a person , and you forget that you have helped me by mentioning that old man with the long gray head .
More often , he said , what makes people happier when they 're unhappy in a career is not a complete change but a tweak .
The shock of encountering a zombie is not the shock of encountering a foreign entity , but the shock of being confronted by the disavowed foundation of our own human-ness .
The people must be aware of the fact that a revolution is not an easy task , that a revolution is not a matter of a few days or months or years , and that this revolution is a task that requires many years .
The economy of a monopoly is not the economy of the country .
An intent to commit a crime is not the same as an attempt to commit a crime .
This means that a thesis is not an experience report .
The Universe is the matter ; a hole is the edge of the Universe because it does not contain matter or spacetime , a hole is not a part of the material Universe .
For a simulation is not a representation , but something altogether different : " to simulate something you need more than mere mimicry , more than an ability to produce actions that are like the ones you are wanting to simulate .
An audience is not a random , or even semi random , selection of people drawn from a particular population .
Surely , if a pension is not a priority for that person at that point in time then , as long as we have explained the benefits , then they should be empowered to make their own decision ?
Of course such a request is not the same as a notice under s 37 ( 1 ) of the Education Act 1944 [ now s 437 ( 1 ) of the Education Act 1996 ] and the parents will be under no duty to comply .
A vagina is not a penis .
Since a corporation is not a person , and the liability for its actions is cast solely on the company 's assets , there is no personal lien , and so no prohibition to lend at interest .
Pulling out a plug is not a hard work , but it is not always an easy task .
Adding supplementary information for specific sub-groups of an audience is not an imposition on the main programme - it just means providing another link , or arranging that the material is displayed in certain user-specific circumstances , and not in others .
Reflection of the sun in a dewdrop is not the sun !
Spectral reflectivity contrasts , as David Wilson and Pat Hayes specify , * correlate * with color , but a wavelength is not a color .
On the other hand , I say that a proof is not a proof until a person is convinced by it .
But - like many things in Africa - buying a bicycle is not a simple process .
They want to see reasoned arguments for claims made , and an appeal to an authority is not a reasoned argument .
The end of a marriage is not a criminal offence .
The completion of an application is not a formal contract .
Furthermore , Rossi 's appeal to the " plenary powers " of the court is undermined by his reliance on a contest statute that clearly anticipates such irregularities as those alleged , and clearly states that annulling an election is not an appropriate remedy unless it can be shown that these irregularities changed the outcome .
But in the end what you find is that a musician is not a musician without influences .
Please do NOT email me to enter this giveaway ; an email is not an acceptable entry .
" A prince is not an archangel .
Splashing out big-time on a striker is not the answer , unless it is within our budget .
" Whether he finishes fifth or a 1 , 005th in such an event is not a matter of concern .
Now spending 10 hours on a plane is not the best idea in anyone 's book , but to spend it in Economy , squashed up with 250 other England fans is even less appealing .
An eclipse is not a destruction but rather a hiding .
They will burn fewer calories in the summer in any event so a diet is not a bad idea .
They may , however , more usefully be analysed as producing status : a person is not an " illegal immigrant " or a " work permit holder " until they cross the border .
It is important to remember that setting a boundary is not an attempt to control the other person ( although some people will certainly accuse you of that ! ) .
Under the heading ' TRESPASS ' , Weston states that ' the threat on the notice board ' Trespassers Will be Prosecuted ' is a wooden lie : for a trespass is not a crime ...
A problem is not a problem if it has been solved successfully in the past - it is trivial .
" One 45 - year-old wom­an wrote that they found that a rel­a­tive was not a na­val of ­ fic ­ er , as had been thought : " When we an­nounced that fact - oooh what an out ­ cry .
A mathematician is not a scientist .
A finalization is not a type of Lisp object .
Watching a video is not the same as being with a teacher in person , Flynn acknowledged .
Acceptance by Sponsors of a Submission is not an admission by Sponsors of the novelty or originality of the Submission .
Quite interestingly , although a SPAD is not a good thing , in of itself it is n't mission critical .
The length of time someone should spend in a sling is not a matter of agreement and a typical time of 3 -4 weeks for young people with a shorter time for an older patient is common .
Mediation at the point where an employee has taken a case is not the answer , feelings are too entrenched by then .
First , a chivalrist is not an MRA .
The times are now dangerous , and I see that a man is not a more sincere or a wiser Christian for all that he is a good Greek or Hebrew scholar .
Paying off a debt is not the same as building up liquid savings in a bank .
The quadrennial ritual of electing ... a president is not an exercise in promoting change , regardless of what candidates may claim and oridnary voters believe .
" Taking judicial notice of a document is not the same as accepting the truth of its contents or accepting a particular interpretation of its meaning .
Gillies opposed the motion arguing that res judicata does not apply because the Complaint alleges new facts and new theories and the earlier dismissal following a demurrer was not a judgment on the merits .
But it is nonetheless an incontrovertible fact that the international media as a whole are not a neutral force on the battlefield .
a woman is not an animal , she does not have a ' place ' !!
But sometimes the person describing a problem is not the right person to provide the solution ( if there really is a solution ) .
ACH A life is not a life unless it is conscious of itself in as many ways as possible .
It may be that some of the persons in our example will be excluded from being promoters in such a situation by reason of Clause 291 ( 2 ) , under which a person is not a promoter by reason of things done in prescribed circumstances .
A computer is not a fixed unit as is the case with an accounting machine ; it is an assembly of component parts with almost unlimited permutations and combinations .
Swearing up a storm about how sleeping longer than two hours at a time was not a super human feat and that this child of mine had better get on board ... and then , there was the quiet , just the two of us in the rocking chair while I nursed that baby and rocked .
I am looking at this as an opportunity as stress relief for me and being able to express my self through an instrument is not a bad thing .
Brenda Sprague , Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Passport Services , said because of the economy , they did n't want to increase fees , but facing a deficit was not an option .
A region is not a given - not physically , socially or mentally .
But a university is not a knowledge factory , and a university education is not about identical students getting identical marks for identical work .
Therefore , using such municipal failures as a standard is not an earnest measure of judgment for an entire field of endeavor .
In another sense , a chief is not a chief to his own wife or wives , or even to other women " .
and NO , G.Z. 's worthlessness as a human is not a factor ..
Besides not everyone believes in God and that is their choice , shaming them and telling them to find a church is not the proper way to handle things .
Jim Carrey gets to be his classic over-the-top self with Steve 's outlandish stunts , but he also helps shine a spotlight on the ridiculousness of these stunt men posing as magicians ( holding your pee for a week is not a magic act ) .
An extension is not a way to add business fields to a message , but rather a way to process all messages , including the meta messages used by the Bayeux protocol .
" Having a debt is not a good witness for the Lord , " Khu said , laughing .
A map is not the territory , but , if correct , it has as similar structure to the territory , which accounts for its usefulness .
The Appellants argued that the size of a dwelling was not a proper basis for an estimation of the capital value of a property .
At times , a referral as an attorney is not the best course of action .
The next step , however , is to realize that a temple is not a structure at all .
" By itself , a key-fob is not a secure solution in the current environment .
A purchase is not the same as settling a debt - a purchase is n't complete until the seller takes the money and the buyer takes the goods .
Salaried Often has a legally recognised governing body ( ie BMA , or IMechE ) A job No progression beyond gaining more experience Waged ( ie hourly , not annual ) No recognised governing body Having a profession , and thus being a professional is not the antonym of being an amateur in the way that words would apply to the sporting world .
And a cooktop is not a furnace ?
And I would respond that a widget is not a human being .
Failing to land an internship is not the worst thing that could happen to you - it 's far from it .
Also lactic acid ( lactate ) though a byproduct is not a bad thing - it is an energy source which you can train to use more effectively .
Bursary applications for girls living in any county are welcomed and the winning of a scholarship is not a pre-requisite for the awarding of a bursary , although the two are often combined .
One day , he gallops through a forest looking for an elf-queen - I have it on good authority that galloping wildly through a forest is not a wise thing to do - and soon encounters a giant .
But a drawing is not a map of the real world .
I thought , " A marathon is not a bad day 's work .
A computer is not the only way to get music .
Ugliness as a tool , a weapon , even as a code is not a problem when it is a result of form following function .
That instability in a school is not a good thing , and to institutionalize it is not a good thing .
I was n't feeling particularly charitable , though , especially as my ears were still ringing from the Song , and a katana is not the best weapon with which to try to subdue someone , so I decided not to reply in kind .
If a road is not a strategic route then it wo n't be part of the TLRN and hence wo n't be a Red Route .
Half way up a mountain is not the right place to realise that your ATV will not be able to get you and your load home safely .
In the early 90 's was constantly lied to by the police telling me a caution was not a criminal record and would not stay on my record for more than two - five years .
All of these facts may be submitted as accepted , but what you propose to say is that a man is not a man , that he is in fact a dog or vice versa .
] An MVP is not a Cheaper Product , It 's about Smart Learning [ ...
Inches on a screen are not the same as inches on paper .
A license is not a transfer of ownership .
The payment of fees to a charity is not a gift to charity and so fees paid to a Trust are not eligible for the Gift Aid scheme .
The payment of a membership subscription by a voucher charity on behalf of a donor is not an application of income for charitable purposes by the charity , even if it is membership of another charity .
In the same way , a payment described as a ' minimum donation ' or a ' donation ' to attend an event is not a freewill payment .
I think that for once the Nobel prize should be awarded to the right people : the peace activists that everywhere try to make people understand that the annihilation of a problem is not the solution of a problem .
And while a job offer at a fair is not the norm , it does happen to people able to show the right blend of knowledge and motivation .
A coach is not a consultant .
If it really does mean simultaneously , and not sequentially , then a multiplexer is not the answer .
Note that what determines the birth of a star is not a critcal mass ( even though that is important in determining the minimum mass required to form a star ) but the temperature reached in the core of the star .
I concede that while the setting of a meal is not an ingredient of a dish , it certainly can be an ingredient of an eating experience .
You need to realise that a person is not a set of behaviours .
" There are many , very large studies that show that a vasectomy is not a risk factor for any longer-term health problems , and that 's very clear , " Sharlip said .
This is a wonderful romance ( and it only ever wanted to be a romance-it 's not a mash-up of romance plus some other genre ) .
They refused to pay up on the grounds that a lightship was not a ' ship ' and so was not subject to the laws of salvage .
The religion of a man is not the creed he professes but his life - what he acts upon and knows of life and his duty in it .
a week is not a long time , its mid winter and £ 10 a day is high ... ask for a round figure of £ ???
" An extension is not the answer .
But a revolution is not an event .
These rulers ' most treacherous crime was the killing of " political life " in their countries , where a parliament is not a parliament , a party is not a party , opposition is not opposition and laws are not laws .
Why would one of history 's most important physicists find it odd that the properties of a star are not those of a circle ?
But if you assume that a confutation is not the first step in a subsequent proof of an alibi , why should they pay the retaliation penalty for the slaughter ?
Such a conversion is not a complication of laparoscopic cholecystectomy and should be done promptly to protect the patient from serious operative injury .
The Art field is one of those professions where a degree is not a guarantee of success or even talent for that matter .
" A journalist is not a judge , but one , who , based on tips or observations , feels there is something wrong and tries to expose it .
a construct is not a lie .
Planting a garden is not that hard but you must do some planning .
Staying in the shower for almost a week is not the only record breaking attempt focussed on the way we wash .
" articles and arguments , i.e. , that they seem to make narrow assumptions about those intending to go to graduate school of , if not whiteness , then at least of a certain socioeconomic standing of which $ 25,000 and a stipend is not a step up .
In my opinion such a chart is not a valid basis for a reliable root chart .
Fools and cretins , a book will not make a plate of soup ; a novel is not a pair of boots ; a sonnet is not a syringe ; a drama is not a railway - those forms of civilisation which have caused humanity to march on the road to progress .
( 5 ) Where a dog is taken into and kept in possession for the purpose of preventing it from causing damage or of restoring it to its owner , a person is not the keeper of it by virtue only of that possession .
THE TRANSITION FROM OCCASIONAL USE TO FREQUENT USE Becoming an addict is not an overnight process .
As my parents always said , " ... an ' A 's grade in a class is not a sign of success .
A traveler is not a traveler is not a traveler .
But an odyssey is not an odyssey if one never makes it home .
While the mediator has to respect the canons of mediation , ensuring that there is always strict neutrality and impartiality and that the parties , themselves , remain in control of the dispute , this paper makes the point that a mediator is not an automaton .
A slave was not a person , but a thing ; a person was a human being endowed with civil status .
A servitude was not a service of a person , but of a thing , and to adjoining land or to a person .
Does that mean a run is not a run ?
To practice Buddhism and be a vegetarian are not the same thing .
There 's the familiar quote : " A revolution is not a dinner party , or writing an essay , or painting a picture , or doing embroidery ; it cannot be so refined , so leisurely and gentle , so temperate , kind , courteous , restrained and magnanimous .
Be a smart shopper : The color of a food is not an indication that it is a whole-grain food .
Indeed , for non-rivalrous goods the added marginal cost of an additional consumer is zero , but adding a cost is not the same as not reducing a cost .
A nickel is not a lot of money .
The ability to get 6 figures to speak at a college is not a right , and therefore taking it away in no way infringes on any rights .
I 'd like to teach in some small way , but taking up a post at a university is not the way to gor me right now .
Ladies , an interview is not the time to break out your Kardashian waves .
For that matter , what other Frenchman besides Brassens could have conceived of " Fernande " ( " An erection is not a matter of will power " ) ?
And $ 18 million for such an organization is not that big .
Each item has a purpose and in the middle of a disaster is not the time to learn its use or to discover it does n't work .
Typically , prying with a knife is not a safe task .
He accepted that there must be factors of fault in order to conclude that a licensee is not a fit and proper person .
Feeling strongly about an issue is not an excuse to abandon our common sense .
An invitation is not the banquet itself , and the sowing of seed is not the harvest .
The current US strategy in Afghanistan of using a carrot , rather than a stick is not the path to success .
blackbody temperature The temperature of an object if it is reradiating all the thermal energy that has been added to it ; if an object is not a blackbody radiator , it will not reradiate all the excess heat and the leftover will go toward increasing its temperature .
Being a scientist is not a part-time job , it 's a vocation .
" A man is not a man until he has a home he can call his own .
Paul Sherman , planning officer for Surrey Heath Borough Council , said : " Tesco want to establish that to go from a shop to a shop is not a change in use , so it does not require planning permission .
But being labeled a mystery is not a good thing either .
Getting swept up in a bubble is not a crime .
Yes , and it happens more and more ; and some of the attention that was first given to microfinance lending , it turns out that borrowing $ 40 , owing all of it back in 10 weeks and paying it back $ 4 a week is not a very good way to do that .
The size of a program is not an obstacle in attaining accreditation .
dude , S I N C E Y O U A R E N O T V E R Y B R I G H T , I W I L L W R I T E B I G A N D S L O W. Understanding a text is not a Miracle .
A user is not a producer and not knowing the difference will skew the results just as counting men would when you are trying to measure the incidence of teen pregnancy .
It never occurred to the rat that an open drain pipe in the middle of a field was not a usual occurrence .
A pharmacist is not a scientist , nor a research scientist .
And turning up on a bus is not a professional look .
Though they 're both visual media , a movie is not a comic book-far from it-so you 've got to express the story and ideas of the film in the unique language that is comics .
Indeed , using a selection criteria which has roughly the same chance of separating people with this illness from a generally fatigued population as tossing a coin is not the most auspicious of starts .
If an agency that receives a request is not the appropriate agency for the filing of the request , the agency shall forward the request to the agency of the county in which the child or the guardian or legal custodian of the child resides , and the latter agency shall proceed with the request .
While an oscillator is not the right tool for the job , it does provide some insight .
3.7 In the first place , there might appear to be fundamental differences between the BassDisc model and a democracy diffusion model : ' advertising ' of a product for sale in a market is not a concept normally used in the analysis of the spread of democracy .
Managing a country is not the same .
" Maintaining a profit is not a burden that was on the police force when they maintained the services in-house .
Considering that tandava 's performance in a procession was not an essential religious rite for every Ananda Margi , it prevented its practice to be protected by the Constitution of India .
So it 's a very-it 's not a resistance that has risen up against mining .
Converting a loft is not a trial and error operation , so do n't be afraid to carefully plan and execute your ideal design ; generally you only have one shot , so get it right .
He says , writing in his defence , that when he urged his opponents with the argument that " a vine and a vine-dresser were not the same , " neither , therefore , were the " Father and the Son , " these were not the only illustrations that he made use of , nor those on which he dwelt , for he also spoke of " a root and a plant ...
This dissertation will show that the love of a man and a woman is not the love of steak and lettuce .
My experience is that the number of years away from a drink is not the always best measure of the quality of sobriety .
FITZGERALD : But if they are told that , assuming 7 we should tell them that , my only point is that we should tell 8 them that a failure to agree upon on a verdict is not a 9 verdict .
The idea of a community is not a logical construct but a sociological fact , and so there is only a finite set of communities to whom one might appeal in deciding how to interpret the word " mammal " .
Application and exhortation A sermon is not a lecture but an address to men 's minds and consciences .
As a translation is not a commentary , few notes are found in this version .
But we know we have a conscience , and that a person is not a mere machine - for that a machine cannot have an obligation , cannot be subject to command , is certainly proved ; but that a person is subject to command , is subject to obligations of conscience , is a matter of universal consciousness .
In the early days of " professional " policing , the job of an officer was not the respected pillar of the community as some view it today .
Why should n't England players wear a poppy on their shirt a poppy is not a political statement , it acts as two things ,1 to raise money who people who served their country and 2 to act as a sign of remembrance for all people who died serving their country what ever side they were on .
A gene is not a unit , but part of an integrated system .
" ... i then replied saying , " sorry if it felt mean , but to be ignored by not receiving a reply is not a good feeling " .. having total disregard for others is something that bugs me .
An atheist is not a citizen ?
" 20 What spectators perceive in a film is not the subject of the film , but themselves as objects within the film ; this is cinema 's greatest deception .
A chant is not an empty signifier ; in fact , it is full of religious connotations that work to situate the poet on a higher plane of reality - a linguistic speaker-of-tongues , an anti-material sage , a wise guru .
A car is not a necessity when you first arrive , but it 's a nice to have if it 's part of the offer .
In general , smaller flaccid penises lengthen at erection by a greater percentage than do larger flaccid penises , with most men reaching an average size of 5 to 7 inches , so the flaccid size of a penis is not a good predictor of erect size .
How can you criticise my Egyptian spelling , when you do not know that an aleph is not a vowel ?
In the words of Kasthuri , " reaching a summit is not an individual ambition ; it is the family 's mission " .
I have to disagree with the statement that was made by someone else saying a podiatrist is not a doctor , he is a specialist in the field of feet and much more qualified than a MD .
A funeral is not a community event .
Yet coming to believe a proposition is not an action , and Lewis 's definition of convention presupposes that conventions are regularities of action .
Appreciate a TV is not an essential item , but for news and background its nice to have .
Even if their theories on how to deal with a problem are not the same that you would suggest , be careful not to shoot them down - instead , go deeper into the discussion and point out the pros as well as the cons .
The power of the gothar rested on their status as legal advocates and a gothorth was not a territorial or hereditary chieftaincy but rather " a professional vocation with entrepreneurial overtones " .
A ritual is not a melancholy formality ; it is a Sacrament , a Dance , a Commemoration of the Universe .
The privet although a half-evergreen is not a conifer , but a member of the Olive Oleaceae family ie it has a true flower rather than cones .
Thanks Andy You nedd to bury then in teh blue tack , or plastcine , as sitting on a stip is not the same .
You nedd to bury then in teh blue tack , or plastcine , as sitting on a stip is not the same .
The requirement to give your whereabouts for an hour a day , 365 days a year is not a reasonable requirement .
I found that the best way to approach the task was to dump the company script as reading parrot fashion from a script is not the best way to go about things .
Maybe a deadline is not a bad idea for a couple that has been dating for over 5 years and one of the parties just will not commit .
In an ideal world , I would go further than the Bill , but the important thing is that if in future , if Governments wriggle , duck and dive in their interpretation in order to avoid a referendum , they will suffer the same fate as the previous Government , who argued that a constitution was not a constitution and were discredited in the eyes of the public .
COMMENT FROM GALLERY MODERATOR : I rather agree that a bar is not the best place to face drunk young military types , and can understand a certain degree of trepidation both from bar owner and client .
Sometimes the outcome of an investigation is not the outcome parents want to hear .
He opined that such a loan was not the class of debt for which it was probable that the new partnership would take on the liability .
As the Full Federal Court pointed out in Foxtel Cable Television Pty Ltd v. Nine Network Australia Pty Ltd & Australian Broadcasting Authority , ' A summary of a work is not the work itself ' .
Apples belong with apples , and oranges with oranges-a fruit basket of a class is not a good idea .
Missing a class is not an excuse for not fulfilling an assignment : YOU get the assignment , YOU fulfill the assignment , or YOU get an F for that assignment .
I have previously stated in this column that branding a version of a game with a license is not a good thing .
Whether the law of the State shall be declared by its Legislature in a statute or by its highest court in a decision is not a matter of federal concern .
An LLC is not a " taxable entity " - in other words , it does n't pay taxes .
Much like a chicken nugget in the shape of a dinosaur is not an indication of quality , I recommend avoiding wine labels that rely on gimmicks to attract attention .
Ibn Mas ' ud reported said that the Messenger of Allah , may Allah bless him and grant him peace , said , " A believer is not an attacker nor a curser nor someone obscene or abusive .
Secondly , since taking an oath is not a common practice in your religion , you must make sure that your witnesses speak no lie because otherwise I will sentence you to Siberia .
Such a practice was not a new phenomenon and had been a common practice for some time .
Light or darkness , sounds and smells leave bodies quite unaffected ; what does affect bodies is not these but the bodies which are their vehicles , e.g. what splits the trunk of a tree is not the sound of the thunder but the air which accompanies thunder .
Just as a human is not an ape , but shares a common ancestor with apes , so Catholicism is related to , but not any more , Christianity .
What I had not grasped , but have now , is the level acceptable for a diabetic is not the level which a non-diabetic runs at .
Being an editor is not a job for those who crave popularity .
The primary message that I wish this article to portray is that the DSM is flawed , fundamentally , and that a revision is not a panacea for all that is wrong with it .
Unfortunately , creating a sim is not a simple process and many , many hours go into them ( and we are talking 1000 's of hours here ) .
On the positive side , however , the mouse seemed to work quite happily on a photocopy of the original mat , plus a cover sheet of self-adhesive plastic film , so getting hold of a replacement was not a problem .
The best of a book is not the thought which it contains , but the thought which it suggests ; just as the charm of music dwells not in the tones but in the echoes of our hearts .
Setting a target is not a substitute for putting in place the measures needed to achieve the objective .
" Judging from how Miller sees it , volunteering to work in a supermarket is not a fun thing , like a sponsored bounce .
But obviously these ignorances shown towards Jody as an individual are not the main problem .
Surely working for a council by helping children across the road or acting at a very junior level in a school is not a great enough connection to stop somebody being a councillor .
" Buying a telescope is not the best thing to do initially , so go along to one of the societies , have a look through their telescopes first and see what you can get for your money .
This could overload the server , as researching a topic is not an easy thing to do , which is why caching ( old ) information could be advantageous .
( 4 months old - 4 hours ) So , just shoving a dog in a crate is not an answer - your dog should learn to love his crate .
That same friend who owned an album by Dave Evans also owned discs by Ian.A ( as I shall now call him ) , the one I remember best being " A Vulture is Not a Bird You Can Trust " if only for the cover and title , the music being lost in time to my memory .
Such a debate is not the focus of this essay however .
' A library is not an obsolete dinosaur , it is not a pointless financial drain on the Government , it is a resource that allows people to learn , to grow , to visit books and each other ...
A beach is not a beach is not a beach , so narrow down to your top three priorities in vacationing and go from there .
Some may argue that spending such a lengthy period of time on a coach is not the way to enjoy a holiday ... but the scenery is outstanding .
Muslims will tell you that concealment of a truth is not an abandonment of that truth if it benefits Islam .
A mystic is not a man or woman of exceptional ability , but a man or woman who claims to acquire religious knowledge by other than ordinary ways : by intuition , for instance .
" What identifies a Mozambican as a hero is not the fact that his body is kept at the Heroes Monument , but all that he achieved during his life for the Mozambican people 's welfare .
I also said a let-down was not a shock .
" Having a studio is not a hobbyist thing , " he says , " it 's a proper working space for proper working people .
Gentleman will know , however , that when a country is not a signatory to the International Criminal Court-as Syria is not-the United Nations Security Council must put forward a reference to the prosecutor of the ICC .
Rob : As an aviation expert , I am amazed that it seems not to be understood that this is a safety issue as follows : An aircraft is not a Grey Hound bus !!
" A contractor is not a government entity , " the panel wrote .
] A host is not an insurer of the safety of a guest while upon the premises of the host and there is no implied warranty on the part of a host that the premises to which a guest is invited by him are in safe condition .
I have become weary listening to males state that a female is not a woman until she has had a baby ( and stating that the function of a woman is to have sex with a man ) .
The court ruled it an act of religious discrimination and in breach of legislation mandating equal treatment , stating that a headscarf was not an " arbitrary piece of clothing , " but an expression of religious beliefs , and wearing it was part of the right to religious freedom .
A keyword is not a target until you assign it to a page and begin optimizing for it .
Our biggest problem as a society is not the inability to screw around with machines and computers , but the inability to think , to reason , and to be capable of relating to different social groups and classes .
Note here that a warranty is not the same thing as a return policy .
An agnostic is not an atheist .
An opinion on the legal abilties of a jurist is not an ad hominem attack .
However buying an equity is not an obvious statement of liquidity preference .
It is worth mentioning from the onset that the food requirements of a child are not the same as that of an adult .
A phoneme is not an individual sound , but is rather an opposition : thus , for instance , we have b / p / c .
However , everybody is on an even playing field and knowledge about how to write a standard is not a prerequisite for creating a vocabulary .
The Politics emphasizes that " a state is not a mere society , having a common place , established for the prevention of mutual crime and for the sake of exchange " but is rather " a community of families and aggregations of families sc. united ] in well-being , for the sake of a perfect and self-sufficing life " ( III .9 , 1280 b 30 -34 , with square brackets added ) .
I learned this from my first city editor , who taught me that a door is not a doorway ; that " no injuries were reported " does not mean that " there were no injuries " ; that a man charged with burglary is not necessarily a burglar ...
Being an author is not all profit , there are expenses , conferences , travel costs , research costs , computer costs .
Possibly the most important aspect of breastfeeding a toddler is not the nutritional or immunologic benefits , important as they are .
Given the time , not having a key is not an issue .
A divorce attorney fees must show an inability a divorce is not the way more convenient than seeing someone with the result .
A fee is not a tax but that is just a technicality , essentially it is the same but with a different name .
Causing a collapse is not the way to go , neither for Germany , nor Greece .
It is as if we should say that a murderer is not a work of God , while we may say that in respect he is a man , God made him .
As such , a collective is not a statutory entity , but as a practical matter it might have to organize as some form of business to carry out its activities .
A firefly is not a fly , but a beetle .
A cucumber is not a vegetable but a fruit .
If there 's a checkpoint with someone who insists an iPad is not a laptop and therefore they do n't have to remove it from their bag , that 's me .
By your own admission a doctor is not a knowledge worker .
Such a refusal is not the equivalent of suicide ; on the contrary , it should be considered as an acceptance of the human condition , or a wish to avoid the application of a medical procedure disproportionate to the results that can be expected , or a desire not to impose excessive expense on the family or the community .
Difficulty in making par on a hole is not an effective indicator of the need for a stroke .
The purchase of insurance or an annuity is not a condition on any bank loan or service .
Dalton is a harsh mentor , and life as a missionary is not the sugar-coated experience that Allen ( and the audience ) expects .
If a fee is not the standard fee it will be listed separately in the course information under the ' fees and funding ' tab .
What is actually captured and what you see through a viewfinder are not the same all of the time , and that is what you get with a camera that is not SLR .
Even if the rug is easy to clean a hallway is not a great place for pure white woolen rug that you will have to clean every week .
A permutation is not an invention .
For many , a barbecue is not a proper barbecue if it does not involve cooking over hot coals .
Unless it is a system , a philosophy is not a scientific production .
Although the young son 's experience as an analogy is not the best choice .
Having a discussion with an officer is not the same as having a council decision , although I think that people recognise the difference between the two .
Having long since lost his School Leaving Certificate , he experienced some difficulty in persuading the organisers that he had an appropriate level of general education to allow him entry to the course ; apparently a PhD was not an acceptable alternative .
A fence was not a good idea , because everything at Mount Vernon is supposed to be authentic and an effective fence would have been an eyesore .
Being a person is not the same as having the rights of an individual citizen .
It 's a most original portrait , one which -- in its extended takes on parts of Jefferson 's life and its complete neglect of others -- boldly reminds us that a biography is not a photograph .
Such a worldview is not a unified one .
Unbudgeability may be a virtue in its place , but to be unbudgeably involved in a distortion is not a great triumph .
Going to sleep on a row is not the death knell of a relationship - it 's just another way of diffusing tension .
If you want to protect your child in every reasonable way you can from death or life-long injuries such as spinal injuries , and protect yourself against the life-long grief , trauma and possibly guilt you would suffer if your child was killed on a motorcycle , then carrying them on a motorcycle is not an option for you .
" Although being a Walter Mitty and a wannabe is not an offence in Australia ( where I emigrated in 1995 ) , impersonating a veteran and wearing medals you are not entitled to , is .
Reviewing a product is not the same as trying to live with it for 3 -4 months ... although in the case of my own phone , the problems became apparent after about a week .
The most prohibitive part part of becoming a lawyer is not the cost of the law degree , but the cost of the vocational course which is essential to qualify as a lawyer .
In this context , and transferring the same concept to the Human Resource field , maintaining a low turnover rate while retaining worthy talent within a company is not an easy task .
Competing threads need to be addressed and a death is not a fait accompli .
A judge is not a scientist , and a courtroom is not a scientific laboratory .
" That 's true enough , but a sports event or a building is not a newscast .
A war is not the same thing as health care for children and elderly people and should n't be in the same sentence .
Rabbi Yitzhak Ginsburg declared , " We have to recognize that Jewish blood and the blood of a goy are not the same thing .
You might never know it was an option-see the later section , " a copy is not an edition " for more on that .
But a copy is not an edition ; what is unique to a copy is not common to the edition .
" To me , to adapt a book is not a question of producing a carbon copy of the book .
Even I know what 's best for the kingdom , and a revolt is not a wise move .
A loophole is not a deduction , but it has become one .
Paradigmatic relations are those that tell us what something might have been but is n't : a physics textbook is not a biology textbook , a textbook is not a novel , a book is not a magazine , etc. Paradigmatic relations define contrasting alternatives , meaningful differences within similarity .
Understanding the processes that produce a judgment is not the same as showing that judgment to be rational .
One more from Wired ... the more we know , the less we understand : uriblank " ... a cause is not a fact , and it never will be ; the things we can see will always be bracketed by what we cannot .
An MA is not a prerequisite for landing your first publishing job : I 'd say having an MA is definitely not a prerequisite for landing your first publishing job .
After all , if a brand was not a product , it could be anything !
A coach is not a doctor or teacher but rather an advocate who works with you to help you manage life to the fullest .
It would be illegal under the 1925 Geneva Protocol to pulverize lead or uranium and deliver it as a cloud of dust over enemy trenches ; so , what is the argument that DU dust from a projectile is not a violation of this law ?
" ) , the fact that a child was not a copy of its father was undeniable .
Part of this was down to practicality : storing aeroplanes in a tunnel is not an easy thing to do ; if oil were pumped in it would be very difficult to get out again .
( 2 ) Holding a horse is not a distinct occupation or business , but part of the duties of a groom .
NOTE : A woman is not a declared pregnant woman unless she says so in writing without being coerced .
Ah , but as I said before , the mathematics of the fields around a coil or a capacitor are not the same as the mathematics of freely-propagating EM waves .
However , let me say that one is left in a little bit of a lurch when - while one knows that a penalty is not the issue , one still ca n't determine what the issue is - or how long it will take to resolve itself .
Moving to a different hole in a colander is not the same as getting smarter .
Such a difference is not a new phenomenon and has always existed .
An arrest is not a momentary detention , but , as noted above , the start of a very negative criminal justice process .
Another thing to bear in mind - the rated ( RMS ) power of a speaker is not a hard limit - far from it .
If a letter is not an uppercase letter , simply print it back out .
This is how Dar Al-Ma ' mûn directors refer to the position , in the market system , of works produced during a residency : " A residence is not a counterpoint to the market , but a time for the construction of work , and producer of works , that are possibly destined to arrive at institutions or other market participants .
An acorn is not an oak tree ; however , it contains the potential of becoming an oak tree .
Where an event is not an integral part of a course students have been asked to volunteer and colleagues involved have agreed to include in the assessment process an opportunity for these students to use the experience they have gained .
As a general rule , a lender is not a trustee of its power of sale for the borrower , so it can consult its own interests as to when and in what manner it sells .
Clearly the three-octave span of an instrument is not a characteristic of a maker since the same maker sometimes used different values for this measurement .
If , as Marino argues , aiding and abetting a conspiracy is not a crime that can be charged under Massachusetts state law , it follows that a jury instruction to this effect is erroneous .
Joint participation in a tort is not the " classic " abuse of corporate form to which the Supreme Court referred .
A plumber is not a musician nor a writer .
DB 2 on a mainframe is not the same as the UDB or iSeries flavours ; in fact , in some areas ( eg .
The two-year rule on expenses is bad enough ; if an assignment is not a compelling reason for me to sell my comfortable house in Cheshire and move to a one-bed flat in some part of London that 's twinned with Beiruit , pull my daughter out of school and uproot my partner 's career , why is being there two years make it any more so ?
A grievance is not the way to deal with a complaint about a treatment decision or a service that is not covered ( see Appeal ) .
It 's important to remember that the passing of a deal is not some show of bipartisan heroism ; instead , it 's Congress barely preventing an entirely self-inflicted problem .
A debt is not a value or a sum of money or a number , it is an obligation freely entered into by a specified legal person to pay a specified sum of money or otherwise deliver specified value to another specified legal person .
What it is like to undergo an experience is not an object of consciousness but something that exists in the directing of consciousness towards ( non-phenomenal ) objects .
( answer still ' No ' ) , I produced my apothegm that ' being a consumer is not a status : it is a function .
Of course , losing a chance of saving a leg is not the same as losing a leg : see Tony Weir , ' Tort Law ' ( 2002 ) , p 76 .
Within the context of The Leadership Talk , a Call-to-action is not an order .
A dog is not a possession but a life .
On your list a focus is not a supermini ... a focus is quite big .
It 's sort of obvious that clients with ( for instance ) degenerative spinal diseases should keep as active as possible but it 's unlikely there will be a record of said client being told a wheelchair is not a good option ( it 's just common sense ) .
A leaflet is not a transfer , a mesh advertisement is not a transfer , and a full sheet ad in the Sunday paper is not a transfer .
Those who recognize the nature of sin understand that what renders someone a sinner is not the scale of human wickedness but the very nature and character of God .
Recording a CD is not a traditional duty for Nottinghamshire Healthcare NHS Trust , but it was the conclusion of a highly successful campaign to tackle the stigma in society for people with mental health problems .
The problem is that the spontaneous formation of a market is not the same thing as the evolution of a legal system , although neither is designed .
But the real issue is , you know , the -- running a business is not the same as being President of the United States .
No doubt about it , a scope is not the fastest gun sight .
Unfortunately a lot of people have a really hard time understanding that an elopement is not an elopement if everyone knows about it .
Because of the many protection and watermarking options available , addressing an application is not a simple matter .
A blog is not the only way to do this , but it has advantages .
A patent is not a claim to property but a permission to gun down those who enter .
[ 15 ] Mr Simmers also stated that the lack of a warning was not the focus of his complaint , nor was it that his children had seen the images .
She 's spent years trying to teach David the rules from " a peach is not a funny-looking apple " to " keep your pants on in public " --- in order to head off David 's embarrassing behaviors .
The worst thing about a hiding is not the physical hurt but the thought you had done wrong in your parents eyes .
MS remains essentially loss but the fact we lose a lot is not the same as losing everything .
I admit that the impossibility of our infinitesimals does not follow directly from this , since a maximum is not the same thing as an infinity , and a minimum is not the same thing as an infinitesimal .
If for example you get warned about carrying a whip you can either a ) give in and lose the whip but never be able to use one again or b ) allow yourself to be arrested hoping that charges will be dropped ( or that the arresting officers will be told off and you 'll be allowed to go ) and that the police will realise that a whip is not an offensive weapon and allow you to carry one .
I 've tried and tried to let him know that a disagreement is not a fight .
But a missile is not a meteor .
Although a table is not a separate reality distinct from the material dhammas that enter into its composition , nevertheless the table is said to exist because in common parlance it is accepted as a separate reality .
First , a length is not a number - not until you have chosen a unit to measure it with .
Its a very big step , but from experience i can tell you an abortion is not a nice thing to go through and you need to be 100 % sure that its what you want to do .
Please teach the cricket , a country is not a country until it has experienced the pure joy that is cricket ... ooh and tennis too !
So to become a guru is not an easy task .
There is certainly no doubt that writing a sermon is not an easy job .
A want is not a need .
Although the writing of a GDD is not a vital part of the creation process , it is of major help to the team of developers , especially when in major projects , involving large amounts of personnel .
The CFLI receive large number of applications every year and it should be noted that an application is not a guarantee for funding from the CFLI .
Losing them in a row is not a surprise - realistically .
A prequalification is not the same thing .
Hence , the essential aspect pertaining to the risk of an asset is not the risk of each asset in isolation , but the contribution of each asset to the risk of the aggregate portfolio .
A document can be rendered in more than one window , thus showing that a document is not a window .
Desecrating a flag is not a crime in and of itself ; it only becomes a crime when people get upset .
Contrary to propaganda , being saddled with a mortgage is not the only route to happiness .
Although payment of a bill is not a precondition for an abatement , an owner risks incurring late fees and penalties if an abatement is not granted .
type-integer [ exception class ] An argument was not an integer .
type-real [ exception class ] An argument was not a real number .
type-number [ exception class ] An argument was not a number .
" A journalist that defends the State to an extreme is not an authentic journalist .
Likewise , a promise to introduce a bill is not a legislative act .
A certificate is not a required component of a VPN .
Calling a lawyer is not the first thing .
" A home is not a home because of its room dimensions or the colour of the walls .
We make our own worksheets , an exercise specifically separate from teaching , after realizing through experimentation that a teacher is not a curriculum developer .
" : Simply repeating an assertion is not a valid argument .
Such an attack is not the result of Thatcher 's psychology , rabidly anti-working class that it is , or some collective insanity suffered by her cabinet .
Most of the sound you hear from an instrument is not the standing wave inside the tube ; the sound is made at the open ends where the standing waves manage to create other waves that can move away from the instrument .
This was a clumsy compromise , since a pardon is not the same thing as being cleared and the conviction for murder remained valid .
Revealed even before all of the troops in President Bush 's surge have reached Iraq , a drawdown is not the White House 's preferred plan .
" Section 9 ( 2 ) provides that " In determining whether a remedy is not a substantial remedy , regard shall be had to all the relevant circumstances at the time the terms in question are agreed .
One of the many myths about artists that these wannabes have blindly bought into is the fallacy that being an artist is not a job : it 's a way of avoiding the need to get one .
A single hexagram and a meaning from a book is not the essence of what it offers .
David Clarke , the leader of the NAO report team , said : " Stopping a brigade of tanks and getting them into a huddle is not the best way to operate .
If documentation were found for Mah as an Arabic element in period , it is not appropriate for use in the laqab al-Mah , since such a byname is in violation of RfS I .3 , " No name or armory will be registered which claims for the submitter powers , status , or relationships that do not exist " , since a human is not the Moon .
j.ii , as an estoile is not a " suitable " charge for purposes of this rule .
In the same spirit , Kuhn insists that induction into a science is not a matter of first learning a series of abstract theories , definitions , laws and then later learning how to apply these principles .
A concept is not a dead form of words , such as a definition , or any kind of reified object , but a living , active form of life , with all the vitality and emotion that belongs to real human activity : a real form of human life which is both subjective and objective .
: The topic of Kruspe or Geyer was a prior " From the Mailbag " question , but what if a horn is not a Kr ...
Amongst investors for whom being a landlord was not a full-time occupation , buy-to-let was being used as a form of pension planning .
A format is not the same as an application implementation .
I know blood tastes better when it 's dried to a busted lip and why Moses parted the Red Sea , that the Old Testament is better than the New , because it is filled with the blood of men and the wrath of God , that a vine is not the truth , but a placeholder for a history not worthy of remembrance .
A prop is not a shill .
Such a revival is not a momentary outburst of excitement , not a temporary manipulated stir , not a mere reformation , but a real awakening , a profound and awful conviction of sin by the eternal Spirit of God .
Having an affair is not the way to handle this .
" If a dish is not that popular is may be sitting around a bit longer , " says Philippe Saraiva , an instructor with the culinary program at Conestoga College .
And yet " representation " as a concept is not a teaching requirement in primary schools .
But somehow , a bookshop was not an ordinary shop .
When applying these tests , it is important to remember that it is almost always possible to construct a non-random algorithm which a specific test will not pick up on as non-random - such an approach is not a proof that the test does not work .
In other words , a chair is not a table , to make sense , you have to name things and give them their properties .
He adopted the legal opinion of Chief Afe Babalola ( SAN ) which is that " The clear position is that a right to be elected into an office is not a civil right .
The court ruled that a " soundtrack " that accompanies a movie is not the same as the Copyright Board 's definition of a " sound recording " because the soundtrack is meant to be part of the movie and includes preexisting sound recordings .
But an industry is not a corporation .
I still do n't know what some of the New Zealander words mean but I can guess that a waffle is not a good thing for your book to be .
Sometimes truth looks like turds because it is nasty and not fluffy and sweet , but highlighting a truth is not the same as throwing turds , really it 's not .
While a growing economy is generally preferable to a sluggish one , a slowdown is not a death knell for PE .
Of course , Greek is not a Semitic language and so the fact that it often represents the q as a kappa is not a particularly relevant argument against my statements regarding the q and k in Aramaic ( and Hebrew ) and Arabic .
She gives him a small shove because a graveyard is not a place to laugh and be happy .
I have also even been informed by exhaust advertisments that a cat is not a requirement for a year 2000 car .
subs generally are quite heavy and unplugging them and an amp is not the most sensible thing to do as your leaving a live connector flapping about in the boot .
Animal Handling is already a rather lackluster skill , so hiding some more interesting applications behind a paywall is not the way to go .
I shall differ from many , especially in the " Sister Island , " upon the following point : In my opinion jealousy or rivalry for the affections of a woman is not a subject to fight about .
" Please Sir , a stethoscope is not an optical instrument .
That said , It is important to keep in mind that choosing a major and preparing for a career are not the same process .
MdD : Even the catholic Church teaches that a ciborium is not a sacred object , because the spiritual does not play hide-and-seek with atoms of silver or iron .
I think part of the answer is that it 's been shown that trying to go head to head with Bloomberg as a startup is not the best or only path to financial data success .
A clock is not a timeline but a circle for the simple reason that time does not begin or stop , it continues without beginning or end .
Reginald -- you have already stated that anyone who sends you a resume is not a really good programmer .
Alexandre did attest to the fact that a style is not a thing you put on like a suit coat , but rather it was something that was part of his soul , and although style could change through a normal evolution of one 's esthetic ( as we have seen over and over again in the study of art history ) , his style for the most part was his brand and his " raison d ' être .
The framers of the Constitution understand that a right without a remedy is not a right at all .
I think a big shift in thinking for a lot of bloggers is needed here : a blog is not a " normal blog " by virtue of being written by a nobody or by someone outside of big media or any large or official organisation .
While a witch-hunt is not a suitable course , the source of the failure must be identified and the causes disseminated through the user-group for the C -7 system .
Now too many folk look at crofting in a different way - things on a croft have to pay their way , and a pony 's not a working animal any more .
A revolution is not a negotiating tool .
" Banging a drum is not a message but I do n't think it would be allowed .
A topic is not a thesis .
A char is not a char * .
Being a crybaby is not a disease .
One of the things students need to know is that although there are 26 letters in the English alphabet , there are 44 sounds , and that the number of letters in a word is not the same as the number of sounds .
If a guy is not a total douche , this is a girl he roots for. This is the first girl we fell in love as boys .
But heres some facts for you s.oce an nottingham is not the 3 best now its now the fourth and its just been over taken by leeds i think .
Remember , a charge is not a conviction , just another round in the US " Let 's Make a Deal " legal game .
The ultimate Shi ' a expectation is not a new revelation but the complete understanding of the spiritual meaning of the final revelation granted to the Prophet Muhammad .
The second respondent , however , expressly found that the cause of the loss in respect of which MCJV made a claim was not the suspension , but the absence of " necessary statutory approvals " .
" a lion was not a running beast , but a great jaw set on four powerful springs of short massive legs .
One man who has called himself a prophet is not a prophet , he is an excuse for frightened , confused people already deluded by the idea that there is a man in the sky watching over and listening to them to exit from the real world and give up their responsibilities .
A brand is not a name .
A brand is not a positioning statement .
Again , a house of worship or other group organized around an ideology is not the same as a business that serves the general public .
YOU however if you really were a democrat are not a loyal democrat or american .
Being able to predict exactly how people will use a service is not a sign of strength , but a sign of weakness .
Merrill testified that the sexual orientation of a parent is not an indication of parental fitness .
Just remember that a reprieve is not a pardon , and CMS will resume shooting on April 5 , 2010 .
To say that a man who has by agreement with a landlord , a right of exclusive possession of land for a term is not a tenant is simply to contradict the first proposition by the second .
One thing that most people do n't realize is - a veto is not a negative action .
For my second one , I asked to do it without pain relief and without sedation , because I had been told a colonoscopy is not that painful .
The dissent identifies nothing in text or in history that suggests that a term of years for a copyright is not a " limited Time " if it may later be extended for another " limited Time .
An okaeshi is not an okaeshi if it does not include the human heart .
A gift is not a gift when a person presents useless goods .
A card was not a substitute for a gift .
The dominant model , with which I propose a break-it 's not the Socialists who invented it .
Looking at it from a slightly different perspective from anonymous above who immediatley pointed out , Eggen qualified it with " Appears to Contradict " A newspaper is not a Court of Law and newspaper articles / columns are not bound by courts ' Rules of Procedure .
Being a musician is not an easy thing .
To give such fear-mongering and historically inaccurate terminology a platform is not the proper role of journalism .
Note : Reporting an application is not the same as contacting Support .
The history of the Telegraphone is again a reminder that a patent is not a guarantee that a wonderful idea will be quickly adopted .
However , an investigator is not a dismisser who ignores evidence because it is inconvenient or merely because someone 's behavior does not comport with what he or she thinks someone would do in a situation .
But a firm is not the only way of taking advantage of division of labor -- there is the alternative of the market .
The key insight is that the flow of a story is not a single line .
( And no , being an addict is not a crime - if it were , alcoholics would be serving jail time ) .
The selection of a suitable process to manufacture a component is not a straightforward matter .
A mirror is not a critique , although it can be the beginning of critique .
Writing a book is not a small undertaking .
Stay out of the danger zone until authorities issue an " all clear " signal since a tsunami is not a single wave but a series of waves .
Proof of the groundlessness of an action is not an essential element of an action for abuse of process .
Although a death was not a result of this accident , serious injuries were sustained and lawyers got involved .
It was added because of transgressions , till the seed should come to whom the promise was made ; and it was ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator 3:20 3:20 A chyfryngwr nid yw i un ; ond Duw sydd un 3:20 3:20 Now a mediator is not a mediator of one , but God is one 3:21 3:21 A ydyw ' r ddeddf gan hynny yn erbyn addewidion Duw ?
Therefore a window overlapping with a wall is not a window resting against the wall , it is actually attached to it .
The identity of a student is not a label but a stance ; a moral reaction to a crassly inequitable attack on the right to education .
When I asked John Nunn and Bartlomiej Macieja , they both seemed to feel that measuring the length of a game is not the best way to differentiate between " good " draws and " bad " draws .
A child is not that fortunate .
When dealing with an in-house pay-per-click campaign , obviously a contract is not an issue .
A review is not the place for a detailed response to Robertson 's case , but it is fair to point out that his evident anti-Catholic bias puts a question mark against the reliability of some of his evidence as well as some of his conclusions .
You ca n't eat the orange and throw the peel away -- a man is not a piece of fruit - Willy Loman .
I could almost lip synch along with Linda 's " Attention must be paid , " her plea to her sons to be loving to their father " because he 's only a little boat looking for a harbor , " with Willy when he pleads for his job with " You ca n't eat the orange and throw the peel away - a man is not a piece of fruit !
Brethren let me say straightaway that an ambassador is not a rank or office - it is a mode of behaviour .
Going without an attorney in a divorce is not the best idea , but you can save by doing what you can on your own .
Throwing money at a record is not any guarantee of success , but having the option - and not taking on the entire burden yourself - is good .
NC : If you 're a family in Somerset who have seen your livelihood , your home , your business utterly ruined a visit from a politician is not the most immediate solution .
The EAT decided that in ordinary common sense the word ' workforce ' does not include a limited company as such an entity was not a person , worker or employee .
A single .50 fired from a jeep is not the most accurate of weapons , the recoil tends to push the jeep over on its springs so doubling the affect of the recoil that makes most machine guns creep upwards when fired .
As a fellow member of the We Demand inner circle , ammy will pretend not to have noticed the boob , but a goal is not a goal until it crosses the line 99.9 % of the time anyway !
The first seeks to explain to children , in rhyme , that a church is not a building , but the people of God who love Jesus and learn of him from the Bible .
It really depends on your point of view , you could argue that running out of disk space while writing a file is not an exception as you should check if you have enough space before you write , much like you check for user name and password before you create a login ticket .
It really > > depends on your point of view , you could argue that running out of disk > > space while writing a file is not an exception as you should check if you > > have enough space before you write , much like you check for user name and > > password before you create a login ticket .
The management of a multi-site was not an issue , but just part of the reason why ICHT supported the proposals .
The definition of competence for a baby is not the same as the definition of competence for an adult .
But now , the alternative we propose to the current trend in the study of conversation as social behavior contains the notion that a transcript is not an incomplete record but rather a theory specifying a notation system .
And in and of itself , the idea of an exchange is not a bad one , if appropriately administered and it does n't come accompanied with all the other things the health care law came accompanied with .
" Just being a parent is not a back-breaking , soul-destroying , spirit-draining , ego-crushing task .
Even if this be so , a view is not a ' trial ' nor any part of a trial in the sense in which a trial was understood at common law .
And the statements that a view is not a part of the trial or that it is not the taking of evidence , and denying , on that ground , the defendant 's right to be present , are invariably found in cases where the defendant requested the view and did not ask to accompany the jury , or waived either expressly or by conduct his right so to do .
Hard copy has nothing to do with a TV show ; a browser is not someone relaxing in a bookstore ; a virus does not make humans sick ; and a mouse is not a rodent ( and there is no proper plural for it ) .
To have built a tower on such a foundation is not an unreasonable assumption as history is replete with examples where present-day holy sites were built upon foundations deemed sacred in earlier times .
A shoe is not a natural kind but an object that will decay and disappear from the world unless we use and maintain it .
A scooter is not a dirt bike , or is it ?
But there is also the plain fact that for all the beauty and decor of its physical location and the splendor of its organization , a library is not a library without books .
A stake is not a cross ; and , although crucifixion may be considered as a form of impalement when nails are used , all forms of impalement do not qualify as crucifixion .
Their efforts are essential to developing new treatments , but starting and carrying out a trial is not an easy undertaking .
You still do n't understand that a cat is not a dog , do you ?
It 's expensive and even a clone is not an " exact " copy of someone else , and even if they were - what 's the problem ?
Having defied the doctor 's odds , Roger feels he is in a great position to tell people that a diagnosis is not the end of the road .
" Of course , a translation is not the Qur ' an , it does not have the power of the original text ; and no matter how good a translation it can never convey the true essence of the book .
Of course , a translation is not the Qur ' an , it does not have the power of the original text ; and no matter how good a translation it can never convey the true essence of the book .
The foreknowledge of a thing is not the cause of its realization ; for the essential knowledge of God surrounds , in the same way , the realities of things , before as well as after their existence , and it does not become the cause of their existence .
( 5 ) If a patient is not a beneficiary , the hospital has a cause of action against the patient or the person legally liable to pay for the hospital services or treatment rendered to the patient for the amount owing in respect of them as determined under this section .
Stomping off down the tunnel like a little girl trying to have a period is not the way to act .
Specifically , a signature is not the same for different works using the same private key .
" A mother is not a witness , " he says curtly .
It was decided in the Massachusetts case , that a clerk in a post-office was not an officer exempted from taxation of his income .
Alldays advertised this wonder with the line that " a pantyliner is not a sanitary pad .
But a pre-approval is not a loan commitment .
In it you might express how renting a car or joining a carpool is not an option if your driver 's license has been revoked They posted an ad looking for a nice home to lease 2 purchase , found one , then posted another ad looking for a buyer - and found one of those , too !
A revolution is not a joke .
The employer 's duty to provide a reference was not an issue that a tribunal had jurisdiction to hear - this should have been pursued in the county court or high court .
A park is not an object but a process !
A laptop is not a human .
The basic position in England & Wales is this : A dog is not a child , it is a chattel ( something you own ) .
Making a profit is not an essential ingredient of a business model .
It is sufficient to repeat the conclusion which was , " that the occurrence of a second unexpected infant death within a family is not a rare event and is usually from natural causes " .
You said that you would consider redundancy - in a voluntary redundancy situation then expressing an interest is not the same thing as signing an agreement .
The debate about whether the United States is and / or possesses an empire is part of academic and popular discourse like never before in living memory .
The tram is no good to me as it goes no where near wherei live and causes traffic A tram is part of traffic , the number of people who use it reduce the number of cars on the road .
Steps , stretch , weight , and stand up exercises for half an hour at least three times a week are part of my fitness routine .
That the CAG 's management was a disaster is part of his point .
Consciousness is unified in the sense that the taste of food and the feeling of an object are part of a single consciousness moment .
" A bookshop is part of the community , " he says .
Such a process is part of a systematic judicial practice according to the SOWA institute : ' There is no obligation to record suspicions of racism , which means prosecution for hate crime can be prevented in the majority of cases , ' plead experts .
The IRS did not agree that a blog was part of the media and denied the request .
Every object created or modified by members of a group is part of that group 's material culture .
Staying in a hotel is part of a mobile professinals way of life .
Where a dwelling is part of a composite property ( ie a property used for both domestic and non-domestic purposes regardless of whether the non-domestic part is subject to non-domestic rating ) , the survey particulars should be completed in respect of the domestic part only .
As for a door I deny that but in respect of a post I concede it as a post is part of a house .
Rewording of items for specific conditions and for people without a diagnosis are part of the standard use of the questionnaire ,20 and items in section B were adapted to be appropriate to this study .
The segments in the circle represent different genres of music within the collection ; the distance of each track ( represented by dots ) from the centre shows how old or recent it is ; adjacent tracks all come from the same album ; and the colour highlights show whether a track is part of a current playlist .
Influential Jewish theologian Maimonides ( Rabbi Moshe ben Maimon ) wrote in his book Guide for the Perplexed that " the term ' angel ' signifies nothing but a certain action " and " every appearance of an angel is part of a prophetic vision , depending on the capacity of the person that perceives it .
What tenants are told about a property is part of an education programme .
" Here , " he says , " a hairstyle is part of a total look ; it 's inspired by music , fashion , a whole scene .
Hence , in my view , it is intuitive to think of zero as a number , and thus , zero 's being a number is part of the intuitive data for the ontology of elementary arithmetic .
For the Calder , playing with a band is part of their identity as musicians , just as playing Tom Ades and Ravel and Mozart represents another aspect .
If a command is part of a series of commands to be sent ( not a part of an extended multiple command ) , the sender should cancel sending the remaining queued up commands .
Drawing a conclusion from the cases studied here , the process of becoming an artist in the art schools of the Soviet Union as well as the know-how gained from such an experience is part of an overall experience that marks the individual and the professional 's development .
When a man is part of his canoe , he is part of all that canoes have ever known .
Each of us comes into the world with a wound-it is part of our human condition .
To make it clear : a move is part of a node and not the node part of the move .
The function used to raise a value to an exponent is part of Compass Math helpers .
A fish was part of the father 's memory of " the perfect day of his childhood .
Bluefish are in the area so coming up with half a spot is part of the game .
The API for detecting an iBeacon is part of the Core Location framework , and should feel similar to the APIs used for geographic region monitoring that have existed for some time .
Accepting an apology is part of an exchange between equals ; it is motivated by and seeks to reinforce fellow-feeling .
The hour-long protest near a mosque was part of a campaign by fundamentalist groups against the controversial author .
As much as cleanliness in a kitchen is part of a habit , thinking about turning off a fryer when it is n't in use needs to be part of the daily habits .
- The paperwork for a job is part of the job so sign for what you 've done and never sign for something you have n't done - especially supervision !
A drawbridge was part of the defences , although this was placed after the regular bridge crossing the Nar .
" I think the fact that we 're not a bar or a restaurant is part of what 's so compelling , because people think it 's interesting , " says Bonilla-Warford .
While it would be fair to say that for many children today a computer is part of the furniture in their home , for the vast majority of children electronic games are a regular but not a central part of their lives .
Right now a doctor being part of an insurance company 's network probably means that he or she is willing to accept the company 's derisory financial terms .
Pulling emotion from a subject is part of the skill .
It is best for courts to examine whether or not sporting a beard is part of being a Muslim .
( B ) This notification requirement does not apply if an action is part of , or fully consistent with , a child 's ISP and the child 's parent or guardian has agreed with the action by signing the child 's ISP .
i think some of you are taking this out of context this lady is an obvious dog lover and thinks that a dog is part of the family and should be treated as such .
Columbia 's obtaining a MRAP is part of a wave of increasing police militarization .
As a visual person seeing a pic is part of what helps me to make that initial decision to send eg .
After all these companies want their kit to look good and ensuring it hangs right on a pro is part of this .
The state of affairs that John is an accountant is part of the state of affairs that he is an absent-minded accountant .
The structural assumption in question is that ' if a collection is part of another , the one which is a part must have fewer terms than the one of which it is a part ' .
It is sometimes the shock and unknown talking I guess , and one a child is part of the family then the rest does n't matter .
I could see a tablet being part of things like a doctor 's office slate replacing all the paperwork and files that he / she must carry from patient to patient .
Indeed a reset is part of the routine when you do a battery change , I may be wrong but I think for the DX 7 s reset involves inserting the factory rom cartridge with the original sounds and loading them .
Two percent of the addresses were located to the correct block but with unknown position along the block , which occurred most often in the rural communities of Lake Arrowhead , Alpine , and Lompoc or when an address was part of a large apartment complex .
Nevertheless , as the 20th century bows out and the 21st bows in , it appears that - though pigmentation as a whole is part of an intricate biochemical network - the colour of our eyes does indeed seem to be in the hands of one gene which codes for a protein known as the P protein .
It does not say that being an animal is part of what it is to be a person ( a view defended in Wiggins 1980 , 171 and Wollheim 1984 , ch 1 and criticized in Snowdon 1996 ) .
There are a couple that Athanasius does receive such as Baruch but he mistakenly thought such a work was part of canonical Jeremiah .
There is a related question to do with arrays ; assuming we have the correct number of dimensions , if the length of an array is part of the type ( which advocates of strong typing say should be the case ) it is impossible to write a single function that can deal with arrays of any size .
The forerunners who would have been sacrificed but who were n't like Isaac and was replaced by a lamb is part of this scenario .
A colony is part of an empire and so colonialism is closely related to imperialism .
The court asked whether an endorsement was part of the penalty and rehabilitated .
The word " gang " terrifies me now - when I was a child being part of a gang was like the Famous Five or the Secret Seven .
For since a man is part of the multitude , whatever he is or has belongs to the multitude as a part belongs to the whole .
All ProcBin objects in a process are part of a linked list , so that the garbage collector can keep track of them and decrement the reference counters in the binary when a ProcBin disappears .
Where a work is part of a group exhibition , the curator will also appreciate an accurate proposal ; installation works can often affect the work displayed nearby .
" Starving artist " is only a compliment if starvation as a spectacle is part of your performance-art act .
Such an effort is part of the maximum program of a Green movement .
A canalised section of the burn leading to a summerhouse is part of an earlier landscape .
Anyone who thought the beach was good for nothing else and ask " why else would anyone come to crosby " is clearly very blinkered in their view of the area and doesnt understand that a beach is part of a community - not just an empty space that needs filling .
He insists on the bodily basis of meaning and stipulates , " A brain is part of a body and in operation is inseparable from it .
When a child is part of the process , they 'll take pride in their work and make an effort to eat their masterpiece when it 's done .
The right to buy and sell a debt is part of the original credit agreement or contract you make with the lender when you open an account .
Moreover , that an idea is part of a spiritual movement that makes some people feel good , at least for a time , is no systematic evidence for that usefulness .
This strip of land had been laid out as a road being part of the Newchapel Cycle Club-House and cottage that abutted Lowlands Farmhouse to the west .
Often , when a buyer is part of a chain , the sale can progress more slowly whilst they wait to complete on the sale of their own property .
My first idea was that Camilla 's body was dumped behind Winkie 's , and Diane 's attempt to reconfigure the corpse as a monster was part of her rationalization process ( i.e. , " that is not Camilla 's corpse they found in the dumpster , but a homeless person " ) .
" The fact that I 'm a woman and a mom is part of what I am , " announced Clinton .
Conversely , not everything that runs in a browser is part of the web , even though most of them are for the obvious historical reasons .
Periodic Review : Once accreditation status is awarded , and a an institution is part of the accredited online colleges , additional reviews are conducted to further verify that the standards are being met , as well as to identify additional areas for improvement .
Where a company is part of a group or has associated companies the profit thresholds that determine where each tax rate applies are divided by the number of associated or group companies .
Reading is intensely personal , deeply Proustian , such that merely picking up a favorite book will summon forth remembrance of its distinctive bliss : " Context , material support , the physical history and experience of a text are part of the text , as much as its vocabulary and its music .
Drawing on Ryle 's article ' Unverifiability-by-Me ' , Ayer argues that since it is only a contingent fact that an experience is part of the collection making up a particular person , it is not logically impossible that I should have had an experience which is in fact that of someone else .
There is , for example , a great deal of sense in an organisation being part of both sector-specific and geographically-focused umbrella bodies , which may offer some functions in common , and being able to choose which one best meets its needs as they arise .
Q : Where a book is part of a series , and the name of that series appears in English and another language on the item , how should the series title be entered into the record ?
You do n't understand the nature of propaganda , so how do you think you can tell whether a report is part of a propaganda operation or not ?
A website is part of the sales process - it is an online brochure , but also a means of getting prospects to make that first step into contacting you with an enquiry .
A karmelith is part of a public domain which is but little frequented , therefore regarded as neither public nor private ground ; by Rabbinical law one may not carry from a karmelith to a public or a private domain , or vice versa .
Although an address is part of my Verizon FIOS , I do not use it .
One thing that I am curious about is the belief that being a part-timer or an adjunct is part of paying one 's dues .
The flood of dopamine in our brain -- whether we are creating art or having an orgasm is part of our natural state , and we are destroying that on a global scale with antidepressants .
It used to be that seeing a film with an audience was part of the fun ... now it 's just an annoyance .
In Tomcat ( and the Servlet specification ) a servlet is part of a " web application " .
To convert a fraction such as 3 / 5 into a percentage , remember that a fraction is part of a whole and 100 / 100 ( 100 % ) is also a whole .
Shane did several charters to NZ and Fiji and on these occasions a navigator was part of the crew .
Will getting people around a table be part of the action ?
A handle is part of every door .
A sentence like " A handle is part of every handle " would , if taken literally , mean that a handle takes forever to make and is never finished .
A nose is part of every person .
A lid is part of every chest .
N.B Where a company is part of a group , the company size is determined by the number of employees in the group as a whole .
If a mini-facial is part of the signature spa treatment , I just ask for extra massage time .
Thank you for reminding me of how lucky I was to meet him and for a time be part of that happy world .
I wanted to show in the book that sometimes not finishing a work is part of the process .
The fact is , even the very name of a business is part of its intellectual property and requires protection .
Attribution can also require a URL be part of the attribution if the URL points to the license info for the work , which you do by marking the post with the CC license .
A node is part of Lattices , representing the theory that a word was spoken over a given period of time .
Whether by accident or design , for great stretches of its mammoth running time LAKE OF FIRE appears to paint the abortion debate purely in terms of religious conflict , and the viewer might be forgiven for assuming that attitudes toward abortion pretty much hinge on whether a person is part of the so-called Christian right .
The blue bars show a group 's actual power : the percentage of winning votes in the Parliament which a group is part of .
You are right a PE is part of a UK company .
But anyways , lets say that it was still used today , it has its own faults ... one problem ( to exemplify ) was the way they ranked the profession ( " by importance " ) a clergyman was part of the highest rank , I doubt the same could be said about them now .
For Tim , the perks of being a writer are part of the attraction of his profession .
Every person in an organization is part of a system .
Note that the negative sign in front of a number is part of the symbol for that number : The symbol " -3 " is one object-it stands for " negative three , " the name of the number that is three units less than zero .
I do n't anymore , I guess I feel an estimate is part of overhead , and is part of the estimators duty , along with gasoline , and other expenses that comprise overhead .
In physical reality the answer should be physical , but even moving through a wormhole is part of the physical experience .
Straw : Special measures involving a jury and the removal of a jury are part of a continuum .
A form is part of a web page that you create using XHTML elements .
" Oh , shooting on location as an actor is part of the beauty of acting .
For instance , a chimney is part of a house .
I recognise that the name of an individual is part of his overall personality .
Some courts have put their decision on the ground that a view is part of the trial .
" That the whole life cycle of a plant is part of the story .
If you pay the loan off early , you may have to pay a penalty if a penalty was part of your loan agreement .
A conviction is part of the fabric of your belief system .
An organ is part of the body which , forms a structurally and functionally separate unit and is made up of more than one type of tissue .
Organs : An organ is part of the body which , forms a structurally and functionally separate unit and is made up of more than one type of tissue .
@ JoshHalliday Why should a website be part of the new PCC ?
The landlord had a statutory mandatory ground for possession On the facts , S had not claimed that a disability was related to non payment of rent .
The grip available from a tire is related to the area of the tire in contact with the road and the weight being carried by that tire at the time .
Some witnesses suggested that the ethical acceptability of an intervention was related to its level of public acceptance , or popularity , or even the degree to which its use was based on " public permission " .
I know Christians who behave as you describe , unfortunately a couple are related to me .
The oral health of a population is related to a range of factors including socio-economic conditions and there is an established relationship between poor oral health and deprivation .
An abstract is related to , but different from , the letter of intent .
A parable is related to you : so listen to it .
In a well-designed oscillator the " cleanliness " of a signal is related to its operating frequency .
Typically , the strength of a trademark is related to the category in which it falls .
The life expectancy of an instrument is related to a specific number of rotary cycles ( Yared et al. 1999 ) .
As you might expect , many of the words distinctive to Peruvian Spanish that you 're likely to come across as a tourist are related to food .
This law says that the volume V of a gas is related to its temperature T and pressure P by the formula PV = nRT , where n is the number of moles of gas present and the gas constant R equals 8.314 joules per mole per kelvin .
Then , by asking an abstract question in turn ( what prices would mean that no trade occurs from initial positions ) , insight is gained as to how the fundamental value of an asset is related to its price .
In Sweden , countered the man from Apple , the levy on an iPod was related to its capacity - and with Moore 's Law continuing to operate , that meant the cost was rising to ridiculous levels .
When it applies to the mouse cursor , Fitts ' law says that the time to hit a target is related to the target 's size and the distance from the starting point .
Accordingly , the mores of the institutions intended for the two sorts of relationship need to be different : eg the bindingness and exclusivity of a marriage are related to the ease of pregnancy ; no such comparable requirements are necessary in a same sex relationship .
Physical attributes of sounds have correlates in the perceptual domain , for example the fundamental frequency and amplitude of a sound are related to its perceived pitch and loudness .
Call this way in which a Form is related to the property it is ' Being ' .
Wonder if the western myth of a baby arriving carried by a crane is related to that ?
And indeed , the length of C source code is strongly related to the number of Assembler instructions generated in the end ( as your example demonstrated non-voluntarily ;-) , and the number of Assembler instructions needed to reach a goal is related to an architectures efficiency .
The charge on an object is related to the number of excess ( or deficient ) electrons in the object .
While the bill 's language amends the statute to prevent the NSA from hoovering up phone metadata en masse , it provides gaping loopholes that could allow the agency to continue with its bulk collection practices as usual , such as if there 's a " reasonable articulable suspicion " that an investigation is related to international terrorism .
The elements comprising a picture are related to each other in a determinate way : " A picture is a fact " .
If you have Java installed the RxNAV app helps you understand how the different semantic forms of a drug are related to each other .
If your avoidance of a task is related to not feeling competent to work on that task , seek the necessary training you need .
One factor driving Pfizer to pursue a takeover was related to taxes .
The number of out-links from a site is related to its hubness .
The DOM is a Document Object Model , a model of how the various objects of a document are related to each other .
The health of a community is related to its social , economic , political , and environmental circumstances : " The social conditions in which people live powerfully influence their chances to be healthy .
( b ) Witnesses features How an event is related to a witness 's motivations , attitudes or interests may affect the strength of a memory .
Media in relation to cases involving children The Press Complaints Commission 's Code of Practice states that the press must not identify children under the age of 16 who are involved in cases concerning sexual offences , whether as victims or as witnesses , nor allow them to be identified by stating that a child is related to a named offender .
I ca n't recall a murder being related to the Poll Tax .
As the dictionary attempts to explain to us , the primary definition of a miracle is related to something extraordinary , something far beyond the normal course of events in ordinary life , something inspiring perhaps and amazing certainly .
Chen said , about half of the hazards after a flood are related to injuries rather than illness , such as injuries from power tools , slips and falls , electrocution and carbon monoxide exposure .
The value of a job is related to how much education it takes to perform the job .
The magnitude of an earthquake is related to the total energy released by the event ; an earthquake has only a single magnitude value .
We had one case here where a coworker was related to a doctor who someone saw and then the doctor revealed the information to the relative who 's the coworker and we thought that certainly raised HIPAA concerns .
Some FMF patients present higher IgD serum levels , and it is not yet known whether such an elevation is related to specifi ...
At the risk of being taken too literally , I would say that my way of looking at the world is related to the " systematic " way as the memoirs of a statesman are related to the ideal state of a utopian .
What is important is how closely a person is related to another person .
The opportunity for progression in a job is related to the nature of the job role , and the effectiveness of the individual 's direct manager .
Thinking around a problem is something that you 're going to have to get used to .
A mattress is something that you 'll be using every day , so you should spend a little more money on a quality mattress .
I 'm not one to use the word resolutions as to me a resolution is something that you so often make but end up breaking so I prefer to use the term " Aims and Goals " .
A bug is something that you can help find so that Mozilla can fix it .
A religion is something that you can choose .
James : And so obviously the preparation of a role is something that you love and is really important to you .
In my opinion if cable management in a PC is something that you take seriously then you probably wont buy a ready made system and if you buy one of these and decide to upgrade any components then that is when you may decide that you want to arrange the cables your own way .
A possibility is something that you consider possible , but do n't necessarily believe to be the case ( but do n't reject either ) .
An assumption is something that you do believe , even if you do so without complete certainty .
An overall is usually used as protective clothing when working , but they have sometimes been items of fashion , especially in the 1990 s .
Note : A barcode is usually used to tell Amazon which product you are sending them .
Norrie 's disease testing will confirm the diagnosis in 80 % of the cases , leaving 20 % of children where a mutation cannot be found , but clinical examination confirms Norrie 's disease .
Descriptions on how to build a coldframe can be found elsewhere , but I will go briefly over a few ways I have constructed a seed box below .
A student cannot be found to have committed plagiarism where it can be shown that the student has taken all reasonable care to avoid representing the work of others as his or her own ( Section 2.1.1 ( h ) of the Code refers ) .
An original can be found here : uriblank < < < < < < < < < Central Fountain with one of the two mid-range fountains at the side .
An example can be found at ( 2002 ) 6 Edinburgh Law Review 244 , but many others are cited in Nick McBride 's provisional bibliography below .
I often like to go back into history to see if the answer to a problem can be found in the past .
Public parking against a fee can be found nearby and , due to its central location , the area is well served by public transport .
As long as an institution can be found via this route , there is no need to keep a bookmark unless the site is frequently accessed .
Now , such a square can be found in the one whose side is five units in length .
If you only want the module 's files , then a list can be found in .
If a word can be found to convey the meaning I intend , it must mean self-rule ; the absolute sovereignty of the individual over himself and all that belongs to him .
Though no prior mention of such an event can be found , starting in 1834 , both Joseph and Oliver claimed the angel appeared to them in 1829 , and gave them " the holy priesthood .
There is , of course , no claim so preposterous that an expert cannot be found to vouch for it .
For an introduction to Bavinck , a biography can be found here .
Robert Buchanan-the author of " Undertones , " - writes an original play , and a management can be found , even in the suburbs , with sufficient spirit and courage to produce it , it is far from gratifying not to be able to speak warmly of the production .
No mention of a sister can be found in two letters from Chalklen 's father , on 8 Jan and 11 Mar 1828 , concerning what appears to be a private financing of ' The Hebrew ' with Blackwood handling the public launch ( MS 4021 , ff. 84 , 86 ) .
There is an EEOC provision that might help explain flight delays namely , that " An employer can be found in violation of the ADA for failing to adjust the work hours of an employee whose chronic tardiness results from depression .
" If a way can be found to stimulate islet growth , we could improve their diabetes and reduce insulin usage or better control blood glucose levels .
It appears to us that such a way can be found , and that it must of necessity be composed of two main sources .
" I think a solution can be found for the outstanding issues , it just needs some sensible discussion between the teams , because the thought of an unrestricted spend in F 1 is unpalatable for all the teams .
If a handle cannot be found in two tries , it is suggested to immediately deploy the reserve parachute .
Unless a solution can be found rather quickly - living conditions for many people would be difficult .
A pattern can be found in people fishing and farming the lower lying land and in using nearby hills as sacred sites .
Indeterminacy does not mean that a solution cannot be found , rather that the nature of the solution cannot be preordained or predetermined .
A supermarket can be found within 1.5 km from L ' Oliveraie de Paul , and Aigues-Mortes with its cafes and restaurants is a 10 - minute drive away .
If Science is released from the iron grip of the Maniacs perhaps a solution can be found .
Surely an extra half an hour can be found .
This does not mean a fish cannot be found in other habitats .
Also , while this book should work with subsequent updates to PDFpen , I suggest that you check the blog for this book occasionally ( a link can be found in Ebook Extras ) ; we often provide information about new updates and new capabilities there .
Such a contrast can be found running throughout Germi 's work - the melancholia of so many hearts left wanting by life , and the sheer exuberance of telling stories for the cinema .
It still believes that welfare benefits for lone parents must not be raised to levels which would eradicate child poverty in this group , instead believing that an answer can be found by pushing and pulling lone parents into work through measures such as WFTC and " work-focused interviews " .
Christmas presents with a provenance can be found at Hen and Hammock , a company that looks closely at its products and their suppliers .
Now most of the time , 2 dogs and a kitten can be found on it ...
Indeed , the law cannot possibly be applied against U.S. citizens ; only an alien can be found guilty under the Arizona statute .
Information on the rule and how it might apply to a company can be found on DNR 's Air Toxics page .
Additional information for obtaining a copy of an interview can be found on our Copy Costs and Policies page .
An example can be found at / gate / plugins / learning / test / relation-learning / engines-svm .
An example can be found at WikiShExamples hashtagblank ( for an individual page ) or WikiShExamples hashtagblank ( for an entire group ) showing how this can be done .
If such a file cannot be found in the same directory as the executable is located then the following error message will be issued .
An explanation can be found in Pavlov 's careful , painstaking methods , his adequate controls , his habit of giving the same problem to several collaborators working in separate laboratories or institutes , with whom he checked results and supervised experiments except in the last years of his life .
If a cause cannot be found or if treatment for that cause is not practical or possible , the good news is that multiple high doses of insulin can generally overcome the resistance .
Proposed action : provided that a co-ordinator can be found , the appraisal team recommend that a ' neighbourhood help ' scheme be established alongside the neighbourhood watches .
Leasing to younger farmers and other tenure options : Many times , if a farm becomes too large to manage or if extra income is needed , a farmer can be found to rent a section of the land .
Trevor Birch has today issued a grim statement that can be found on Portsmouth 's official website and has told media that the club will go bust in weeks unless a buyer can be found .
Run , stay awake , run harder , stay awa ... zz ... longer until an antidote can be found .
We reserve the right to change the prize due to circumstances beyond our control or to offer an alternative of similar value , or where an alternative cannot be found a cash alternative .
In many cases , a connection can be found with the Parish Registers .
Because the book is of this nature , there are many examples of symbolism which probably do not exist , but that 's the point of the book in some ways , showing that a meaning can be found in anything , and interpreted in several different ways .
I really hope a team can be found for Long Marston and that the owners are happy to let them loose .
Recipes as an idea can be found back into the distant past , in fact as far back into recorded history as the early Egyptians , and quite possibly further than that .
So , he makes it known that he will only allow Bianca to be married if a husband can be found for Katherina .
Information on how to submit an assignment can be found on the VLE Support Site in the Submitting and Electronic Assignment guide .
If one is melancholy and suffering in the least degree from ennui , a remedy can be found by spending an hour or two with Mr .
The circle appeared as a symbol in the dreams of his patients ; Jung wrote that ' The true mandala is always an inner image , which is gradually built up through ( active ) imagination , at such times when psychic equilibrium is disturbed or when a thought cannot be found and must be sought for , because it is not contained in holy doctrine .
In the unlikely event that a parcel cannot be found or tracked within 30 days of dispatch it will be considered to be lost and we will send a replacement or offer a credit .
Written recipes as a concept can be found far back into the far past , at least as far back into history as the early Egyptians , and possibly even further than that .
More info on lockpicking as a sport can be found on uriblank or uriblank .
Unless a way can be found to attract more new buyers into the second hand timeshare market , I cannot see how timeshare can survive in its present form .
If a region of the brain does not perform its function properly and a region can be found in another brain that would perform that function properly , can we transplant it and still have the same person ?
Unless a solution can be found that can lead to more uniform coverage across the country , then it seems inevitable that SMRs and HERs will continue to progress at an uneven pace and in an ad hoc fashion .
Card Cannot Be Found If a card cannot be found , the Director reconstructs the deal , as near to its original form as he can determine , by substituting another pack .
Card Cannot Be Found If a card cannot be found , the deal is reconstructed as nearly as can be determined in its original form by substituting another pack , and penalties may apply ( see 3 . , following ) 3 .
The minimum element of a set can be found by first sorting it in ascending order and then taking the first element .
The maximum element of a set can be found by first sorting it in ascending order and then taking the last element .
Special significance attached to numbers or their position in a sequence can be found in most belief systems .
We need to invest in a proper cycle route along this stretch so that a solution can be found which pleases everyone .
When compared to top competitor machines in this price range a comparison cannot be found , this Pfaff Ambition Essential is way ahead .
A treasure can be found by looking on the side of the road .
I comment on this in my book - an example can be found at Holy Trinity Orthodox Church in Parma , Ohio .
More information on choosing a rescue can be found at What To Look For In A Responsible , Reputable Rescue .
( A PDF can be found here ) .
Further guidance on information to be provided to participants before the commencement of an investigation can be found here .
There were some magnificent models and armies on display and a selection can be found on the Games Workshop Warhammer World Facebook photo album here uriblank Prizes were also awarded for the most heroic acts undertaken by heroes and units .
Shops , services , restaurants and a supermarket can be found on the ground floor of the Checkpoint Plaza - the apartment and office building in which the apartments are housed .
A somewhat different perspective on what marks a fanatic can be found in this essay .
I 've stopped uploading most new images , but a lot can be found here .
The version given here was printed on a broadside by Webb and Millington of Leeds who were printing c .1840 -50 and a copy can be found on the Bodleian Library Website , Firth Collection b 26 ( 534 ) .
" I 'm not sure that an alternative can be found , " Yehuda Rotem , a spokesman for the Egg and Poultry Board , told BBC News Online .
All info about the work and a video can be found here uriblank .
" The longer you leave it , the less likely a rescue can be found .
A third can be found at in the West Garden of Hatfield House ( with what appears to be a Coastal Sequoia in the pinetum ( plantation of conifers ) in the arboretum ( tree garden ) .
A restaurant can be found only 200 metres from the Hid Hotel .
Sounds like a few bad eggs are ruining it for everybody - I hope that a balance can be found .
A similar set-up featuring the relationship between a young human and a vampire can be found in Let The Right One In , by Swedish filmmaker Tomas Alfredson ; but Alfredson succeeds far more successfully in tackling the loneliness , longing and compassion of adolescence than Twilight 's glossy high school fantasy romance ever could .
The diocesan statements to which this is a reaction can be found here .
If an algorithm can be found to increase cache hits ( see above ) then multi-threading may lead to reduced execution times on a parallel machine .
Too much of news loses its value and its context over time but if all of the stories related to a subject can be found in the same file , well that 's an incredibly powerful resource , allowing for diversity of perspectives and depth , without requiring search .
What is meant by " completing the whole demonstration , " by something having a " foundation , " or by " a reason can be found ?
It is not surprising that a test can be found which shows IIS having better performance than Apache , since Apache concentrates on getting good performance in real world situations .
We have shown that , by inserting a non linear electrodynamics term in the right hand side of the Einstein Field Equation , an exact non-singular solution of such an equation can be found for a collapsing body .
It follows , that , until a man can be found who knows himself as his Maker knows him , or who sees himself as others see him , there must be at least six persons engaged in every dialogue between two .
An example can be found in Cromwell 's proclamation of war on Spain , which included a litany of Spanish abuses of English freedoms in the Americas from the late sixteenth century onwards .
( A copy can be found on the CCP 4 website at uriblank ) .
More information about running tests on a vm can be found here .
A balance can be found within the team ensuring that each eco-climatic system is sampled as thoroughly as our resources allow .
There are two RTGs on Galileo , each with 72 pellets ( a paper about RTGs with a diagram can be found at NASA 's Space Science website ) .
The spending review cut £ 20 m from the Olympic Delivery Authority 's ( ODA ) budget , £ 7 m of which was found by abandoning plans , unless a sponsor can be found , for a much-hyped plastic wrap around the Olympic Stadium .
A link can be found on the University website .
( A link can be found at the bottom of this posting . ) Full book details and sample pages are on the Flesk website .
The mathematical details are pretty tricky ; suffice it to say that this is a self-consistent problem , and that where a solution can be found it is unique .
He develops David ( Haley Joel Osment ) and gives him to the first test-family , Monica ( Frances O ' Connor ) and Henry ( Sam Robards ) , a family whose own son is in frozen hibernation until a cure can be found for his illness .
If you wish to keep to the grass , fording this stream is harder , but if you are determined a way can be found along the east side of the stream from by the bridge .
If anyone on the Forum has ideas on how such a cycle can be found on a desktop computer , please post .
If a volunteer cannot be found to deliver papers each month your paper will have to be collected from either the Library or the Post Office .
The idea that natural objects have meanings that can in some sense be ' read ' like a book can be found in the bible itself .
Guidance on how and when to make a claim can be found at uriblank .
But even in that Act the recognition of a distinct requirement for an accident can be found .
From then Florentine arches became popular and a number can be found in Stoke Newington .
If a way can be found to make even disgusting methods " productive , " then why not apply them-even if they are potentially lethal-in order to extract vital intelligence ?
An example can be found on : uriblank then click ' send to phone ' The pop up should also include a box that someone can check or uncheck that will allow their phone number info to be saved into my excel database .
Once they click the final send button , a text message should be automatically sent from my email address to the sms gateway ... example number at vtext.com 2 ) I want all restaurants to say whether they are open or close based on the times given : an example can be found on uriblank on the time , some restaurants say open in green , and others say closed in red .
The current workflow step of a document can be found on its Properties - > Workflow tab .
The eCCP 1 project had been involved in number of meetings that have been held to consult with the international quantum chemistry community and gather these requirements [ Towards a Common Data and Command Representation for Quantum Chemistry , uriblank ] ; a summary can be found in the TWiki document ' Data-type requirements ' .
The eCCP 1 project had been involved in number of meetings that have been held to consult with the international quantum chemistry community and gather these requirements ( Towards a Common Data and Command Representation for Quantum Chemistry , uriblank ) ; a summary can be found in the TWiki document Data-type requirements .
A key figure in the VCA was Isobel Wilson ( 1908 -1994 ) , an interview ( 1992 ) and an obituary can be found at uriblank .
It is sad that a compromise cannot be found that is acceptable to everyone , but sometimes this is impossible .
Within the parish , which is in the Hundred of Ermington ( Hermentona ) there are three Manors , namely Cornwood , Fardel and Blachford , and in Domesday , where they are called Cornehuda , Ferdendel and Blacheorda , an account can be found , not only of the different grades of dependants , but also of the cattle , sheep , swine and goats within these Manors .
Still further up the road and down a footpath can be found the majestic remains of Wilton 's castle .
( This was on the ABC 's Landline programme , first broadcast on 27 July last year ; a transcript can be found here .
An overview can be found in " Catch the Buzz " at uriblank .
On average four or five a week can be found .
If a buyer cannot be found , Geemore intends to continue but the operation may be reduced to a smaller operation with lower overheads , in a controlled and responsible manner , whilst ensuring that customers are not affected .
Where an authority has planning powers , as this one does , it seems quite wrong that there should be no directly elected input if a way can be found to achieve that .
19.7.5.3 Any circumstance in which a resident cannot be found inside or outside a facility and the police are summoned .
The resistance of a component can be found by measuring the current through , and potential difference across , the component .
This may be difficult to comprehend unless you have an example which violates this rule , and such an example can be found in the Circle-ellipse problem .
I believe that the depth in a game can be found to a large extent in the player .
All too often the family lives in a tiny apartment with eight or twelve other people with children having no place in which to study or do their homework - in a household where nobody reads for pleasure and hardly a book can be found on the premises .
Cable Cast-on : A demo can be found here .
Further information on using our powers to suspend or remove a trustee can be found in OG 117 How the Commission deals with Investigations Work .
A discussion can be found here starting at slide 10 .
Further detail on action to reduce government 's carbon emissions by 10 % within a year can be found here .
If a way cannot be found to settle a valid complaint , it will be passed to the commission to look at and weigh against the code .
The state of a checkbox can be found with a simple if ( boxObj ect.get SelectedObjects ( ) !
In certain substructural logics , such as linear logic and the Lambek calculus , and in the fragment of the relevant logic R without disjunction , a Gentzen system can be used to show that the logic is decidable , in that an algorithm can be found to determine whether or not an argument X ⊢ A is valid .
If no IP address for a host can be found , what happens is controlled by the host_find_failed option .
In a 2007 Pew survey , Muslim-Americans said by a margin of nearly 4 -1 ( 61 % -16 % ) that they believe a way can be found for Israel to exist so that the rights and needs of the Palestinians can be met. That is nearly the same response given by the U.S. public as a whole but dramatically different than the views expressed in seven predominately Muslim countries surveyed earlier by Pew .
The x-height of a font can be found in different ways .
If you pass along a message that is not explicitly an advertisement but serves to alert others of a location where an advertisement can be found -- even if you 're mentioning the advertisement only to lament its existence -- you will be warned not to do so again .
The question now is whether a consensus can be found that systematically addresses the new realities of war-reporting .
Milligan 's Wake , a new A.T.V. show , made nice use of still photography and brought together the promising combination of Spike Milligan and the Galton and Simpson script partnership ; if a director can be found to keep Mr Milligan 's anarchic talent on the rails , the programme may go on to inherit the position left vacant by Hancock and the Steptoes .
We are just over dealing with the Bellows Falls equipment and word comes that Steamtown will be scrapping quite a few New England pieces UNLESS a home can be found .
For the future new definitions and the use of new technology may resolve many concerns for deaf and VI candidates , but those taking exams in 2007 and 2008 are going to be caught in a cleft stick unless a way can be found to give access whilst still complying with the detail of the DDA .
But , under a controversial " law of parties " , in Texas an associate of a perpetrator can be found co-responsible in a capital case .
More information and an application can be found at : uriblank .
A selection of her stories , and a bibliography can be found in Barbara H Solomon , Short Fiction of Sarah Orne Jewett and Mary Wilkins Freeman .
A recording can be found here .
If such a rectangle can be found , its border should fit into a 32 × 32 array .
The unfolding of events is an inspiration to unorganized and organized workers in all sectors that an alternative can be found in actions with analysis .
Avatar above does make an excellent point about the " credentialing " problem , but if a solution can be found to that , then the road ahead should be paved and ready .
I think a really good definition of the word " slut " that has been milling around for around a decade can be found in a book written by Dossie Easton and Janet Hardy called " the Ethical Slut " , it 's known within the queer polyamorous and BDSM circles quite well already .
Someone has to at least identify the problem and then maybe a solution can be found .
So far we have had two sessions with 7 and 5 kids attending but we will be looking to get more kids down - and of course you can help this - a flyer can be found at this link to our Thursday Youth Cricket Coaching sessions .
A flyer can be found at this link to our Thursday Youth Cricket Coaching sessions .
Written recipes as a concept can be found back into distant history , in truth as far as the ancient Egyptians , and maybe further still .
A date cannot be found for the chapel 's construction , but it is located off road D 785 , around five kilometres east of the town of Saint-Rivoal and about a similar distance north of Le Moënnec , just south of the junction with road D 42 .
I hope that a buyer can be found .
A sampling can be found at this site .
Sometimes a solution can be found which solves multiple design problems .
An organization can be found by either entering a search term into the ' medical associations ' search box or by clicking on an alphabetical letter to view every association for that particular letter .
If you had paid for Xanga Premium and saved your archive files before switiching to WordPress , an importer can be found here .
But honoured sir , When a son can be found that dares do more For 's [ 47 ] father 's life or honour than myself , I 'll forfeit mine inheritance and your blessing ; 100 So much your love engages me .
Sometimes a beetle can be found inside the shoot , or a second hole where the beetle exited can be found .
These are the two " offences " under which an architect can be found guilty .
Gold panning is a possibility if a way can be found to have a meaningful amount of gold without having the price prohibitively expensive .
Information on serving as a reviewer can be found at : uriblank .
It seems that a solution can be found , but it will require some care and will complicate the process , requiring that a core file with the orientation points be maintained , copied , and used as the base for each subsequent working file of survey data .
But because an assistant cannot be found to work with Michael for more than a few hours each week , he only goes in on Monday and Tuesday mornings .
Sitting lounge and relaxation area with 2 Jacuzzi 's and a sauna can be found in the basement of the hotel .
An overview can be found at the website of The European Environment Agency .
An adequate theory of transaction costs-although fragments of such a theory can be found in chapter 5 and elsewhere .
Interestingly , the requirement of causation seems to conflict with s .18 ; this provides that under the corporate killing offence an individual cannot be found guilty as an accessory to the offence .
But this has been " significantly reduced " because of Lufthansa 's failure to sell no-frills subsidiary Bmibaby which BA now intends to shut down in September unless a buyer can be found for the business .
This means the station will have to cease broadcasting if an alternative cannot be found quickly .
But what the court did say is that under the statute that the prosecutor decided to charge Fourtin with violating , yes , if in fact the victim was capable of physically making her lack of consent known , then a person cannot be found guilty .
An example can be found at uriblank .
According to something called quantum theory , an electron can be found anywhere around the nucleus .
This text has now been the theme of sermons for more than fifteen hundred years , and will continue to be until the day of judgment , before a person can be found who fully believes and keeps it .
This will be hosted in Reading , at the Rising Sun Arts Centre on March 25th. The venue is 10 minutes walk from the train station and a map can be found at : uriblank Parking in Reading is crap - in fact driving in Reading is crap - so try to come by bus or train !
A solution can be found in universally applicable safety switching devices that can be easily configured using an external switching system .
Modric is a good player , above average but he 's not as promissing as Bale is and a replacement can be found in Europe or abroad ( I suggest Ganso from Santos-Brazil ) .
Alternatively , you can type a location where a repository can be found .
A specimen can be found growing in the Arboretum at Hatfield House .
Mr Alieu Conteh , chairman of both Vodacom Congo and of CWN , said : " To be compelled to resort to the law in resolving a business dispute is never desirable if an alternative can be found , but we feel we have been abused and exploited by Vodacom , and they have refused to take our grievances seriously .
A half-pipe can be found at the bottom of the Aravet gondola in Villeneuve .
I call upon the professing Christians , I call upon the philanthropist , I call upon the very tyrant himself , to show me a page of history , either sacred or profane , on which a verse can be found , which maintains , that the Egyptians heaped the insupportable insult upon the children of Israel , by telling them that they were not of the human family .
In Cook , the state appeals court held that a defendant cannot be found guilty of a conspiracy if he was simply found to have aided and abetted in the commission of the substantive crime .
Whenever content on a site can be found at multiple URLs , it should be canonicalized for search engines .
" While the council 's capital programme includes a sum for the site acquisition , testing and development signs are not encouraging that an alternative can be found .
The manager reported if the resident does not have family members an advocate can be found .
Many breeders and breed clubs have their own version of a puppy contract but APGAW hopes that a resolution can be found where only a single contract is used and promoted by all stakeholders .
There ai n't nobody but a substitute can be found for them .
The existing actions held by a menu can be found with actions ( ) .
All of the material you need to create a website can be found free online if you do not want to purchase some popular program .
Now it was shown above ( Q [ 19 ] , A [ 5 ] ) , that we cannot assign any cause of the divine will on the part of the act of willing ; but a reason can be found on the part of the things willed ; inasmuch as God wills one thing on account of something else .
A tutorial can be found here ; it 's written in Finnish , but the pictures are very helpful .
* Corporate Liability o Common law method ... + A corporation can be held liable in criminal law . + A corporation can be found guilty of a crime requiring specific intent for actions committed by its agent if ...
An archive can be found here .
An LCD stand can be facilitated in the office or expo display situation and a solution can be found whether you need a stand-alone display , or prefer your LCD panel to be integrated into a counter or display .
Further information and an application can be found on the NRVP website at uriblank .
A map can be found at uriblank ...
On August 2 , 2005 , a consolidated amended complaint was filed in the action , a copy can be found here .
Often a glossary can be found in the back of various drama reference books ( see bibliography ) .
If they need a break then this can only be for an hour or so and then only if a student can be found to sit in .
An example can be found below .
The top ten best pranks ever pulled by a rival can be found here , along with a short list of pranks gone wrong .
As for membership issues , I think that a model can be found in churches .
For your everyday needs , a supermarket can be found close a short drive from all of our Pollensa villas .
Btw , I still agree that if a way can be found to defer this to ES 7 without breaking anything , then or now , we should .
> Btw , I still agree that * if * a way can be found to defer this to ES 7 without breaking anything , then or now , we should .
Demonstrates the procedure whereby the tuning of a piece can be found from the recording .
Incitement is the act of persuading or encouraging another person to commit a crime , and a person can be found guilty and held liable of incitement , even if the actual offence was never committed .
Russia and France believe a solution can be found to the crisis .
A summary can be found at : uriblank and the full report at : uriblank .
even such a person can be found a role in scouting .
Details on how to carry our a non-payment can be found here .
We have had numerous meetings , phone calls and emails with the council and we are negotiating until a solution can be found .
Mike smiled as he looked at his homemade bandage , and said " You sure know how to make a man feel like a kid , do n't you Jess !
Yeah , I feel the same way about N. Watching my little ninja hit a minefield feels like I 'm being rewarded for failure .
And a minute feels like an eternity , anyway !
I know what an elephant feels like when he is angry or sexually aroused , and what it is like when water enters his trunk .
Sometimes , being a writer feels like getting paid to pull a rabbit out of a hat over and over again - but each time it has to be a new breed of rabbit , " miraculously " emerging from a different style of hat .
Truthfully , if destiny fulfillment was really based on what a person felt like they should be doing , Moses would have never delivered the Israelites from Egyptian slavery .
You might gain some insight from the experiences of a neuroanatomist who had a stroke-and felt like she had found nirvana .
Women will be alone if you make a man feel like you DON ' T NEED HIM !!!
Whun Thursday nicht cum A declare A jist felt like a man that wuz gaun tae be hanged .
Real Palm Trees make a home feel like home by giving you the feel of nature inside or out .
What does running a startup feel like ...
You know this , if you 're doing something you love , an hour feels like five minutes .
" You could easily call Purdy the unit ' cheerleader ' because he is always upbeat , nudging others to perform well and making a person feel like they can meet and accomplish a challenging situation , " said Cindy Kelly , the head of library human resources .
" I respect not immediately disclosing the pregnancy , especially if you are n't planning on going on maternity leave immediately and feel you have time to broach the topic later , " she says , " but to be told via text message while canceling an appointment feels like a boundary issue .
Weighing 78 tons , it makes a minivan feel like a mini Cooper .
At that time I could n't see any other careers that grabbed my enthusiasm and a PhD felt like a natural progression from what I was already doing ( research student in a Swiss institute ) .
When a film feels like a play , it becomes static .
Nick has height but makes a snail feel like usain bolt !
Which can be nice sometimes , when an album feels like it needs to be listened to all at once because all the songs flow perfectly into one another - and this album does that a little bit , but I 'm not feeling that emotional about this music .
In an otherwise deeply contemplative , even broody , memoir , such a lacuna feels like a glaring omission , but the reader gets the distinct impression that some events in Rice 's life are simply too painful for her to discuss .
On the other hand , if a course feels like an easy A : do n't just aim for the A , ask the professor for extra reading .
If there 's anything that can make a girl feel like she 's just walked into a science fiction novel , it 's alighting at a station called West Portal .
So you 've got Simonson and Simone trying to pack in story arcs and massive guest stars and then you 've got Johns just kind of ambling along with a little pseudo introduction to JMS ' relaunch piece that goes nowhere ... and it makes a reader feel like this book should have been much better coordinated .
If an artist feels like their free material is detracting from sales , they can always monetize it later , said Eric Henry , senior director of Rostrum Records , the label that manages Wiz Khalifa .
If a bride feels like an outsider , she will resist integration into the household .
" You have to make a man feel like he 's not waking up in Barbara Cartland 's underwear , " she insists .
The par 3 sixth hole into the wind is as hard as any hole and holes 7 , 12 and 13 are par 4 's at over 440 yards and into the wind a bogey feels like a birdie , superb golf course of which I pride myself on being a resident of the town of Portrush .
There was too much detail and not enough immersion ; and , because the tone was the same throughout - of an overview rather than a living , breathing story - the whole thing as a result felt like all build-up and not enough consummation .
I think that larger calls to action appear to be disregarded because a visitor feels like they are sympathetic , yet ultimately removed from the issue being discussed .
Toning down the photo grid a bit feels like the right move .
A single-button closure will look the smartest , taking you from casual and business straight into any last-minute evening event where a dress feels like too much .
Think about what that says about society : The people who are already powerless , as a result feel like they 're less worthy to be in power and thus stay powerless .
Helping someone who is struggling to create a business feels like a meaningful use of your mind and your resources .
" Using crutches or a wheelchair feels like painting a bullseye on your chest above the words , ' Abuse me , I 'm disabled !
The view from the rickshaw was only a few feet further off the ground than you 'd get walking , but psychologically very different ; the vehicle seemed designed to make a rider feel like master of all he surveys .
None of these changes-which can be largely automated-would compromise Apple 's secrets , increase engineering workload , or cause the company to make any additional commitment to developers , but they would go a long way towards making anyone who reports a bug feel like they 're actually being listened to .
If a project feels like it 's turning on you , give it some space .
It 's hard to put your finger on it , but that 's what a chill feels like .
Shooting or bombing a wall felt like you were blasting a chunk out of a living creature ( even when they were supposed to be rocks . ) When I froze enemies , it really sounded and felt like I was freezing something that had been alive ( and would be again , if I did n't blast it some more .
If a sysops feels like fixing a close tag in there , thanks .
Leaving a town felt like riding into a black wall .
untill saturday anyway , its absolutely f * * * ing sh * * e the manager is a dosy manc , the hours are long , the job is pointless and its dead in there so an hour feels like a day .. other than that i labour with my uncle when i can , but yea having a civvy job is a nightmare with training because your doing something that not only do you not want to do , but hate to do , and on top of all of this it affects training and things .. aaagh i go round the world in a month n then ave me prmc to look forward to when im back , happy days for now .. keep the goal in mind and it pushes you through this crap in the mean time ..
The problem is that reading such a book feels like defacing a relic .
The NPCs do n't make much impact as individuals , but the population as a whole feels like its full of real people with real problems .
En-route and stuck in the traffic one of the ambulance crew remarked " Now you know what a woman feels like when having a baby " .
Having a diagnosis felt like a weight had been lifted .
In my Diet Coke-marinated brain reading a book feels like the sort of events that 's sufficiently undeserving of note to be doable in under a couple of hours , like baking a cake or sweeping .
So , even though signing a petition feels like a drop in the bucket , every action counts a bit !
Someone once said that February was designed for those who do n't drink to know what a hangover feels like .
Does knowing what a contraction feels like make your doctor a better doctor ?
That was one of the nice things about the Wap , although it catered to the long haired hairies which included some of the girls it also had an open door policy if a smoothie felt like slumming it .
If you have any questions or want to meet me for a chat and see what a blessing feels like , please let me know .
Focusing its marketing towards fitting around a user 's life , rather than dominating it , is a refreshing tact and one that one that will make a consumer feel like they are the important one .
When you think of it , if a link feels like out of context , and you ca n't come up with proper place ( and anchor text ) for it , maybe that link should n't be there at all , but something else instead .
" The connection is so vivid because El has spent the album , and his career , painting himself as a kindred spirit : Cancer for Cure is what a scream feels like when it never leaves your brain .
What does a pacemaker feel like ?
What I 'd say the numbers show ( or at least hint at ) is that when the ratings are dropping , a showrunner feels like he has to do something .
As early as 2006 Jeff Jarvis was describing networked journalism as a process , but building on the open source software ethos that undergirds Sills paper , her focus on journalism as a service felt like a helpful extension of this idea .
In a consciousness raising workshop on the first day of the Summer School , participants were invited to reflect on what being a feminist feels like .
That 's what a library felt like .
How long does a minute feel like ?
Nausea - is a sensational feeling that makes a person feel like throwing up .
Every direction you took for a time felt like a misstep .
Kate Hilpern : Being asked to be a godmother feels like an important role that 's difficult to refuse .
It 's never nice to leave a gig feeling like it could 've gone better or we could 've played better but it does make us more determined to get it right the next time .
If a person feels like they are being " called " or approached by the spirits of Haiti , the first thing a person should begin to do is to serve their ancestors , perhaps beginning with an ancestor novena ( see the links below ) .
It might be chaotic , but sometimes that 's what a jumpstart feels like .
I write fiction , and it 's not my ambition that a reader feel like my story is a work of journalism .
A subplot in the second episode about Eve getting nervous over having a friend she thinks is a lesbian feels like it was imported from 1994 .
The film unfolds like Apocalypse Now in reverse - rather than a journey into the heart of darkness , it 's a story that begins in hell and shows us the kind of doomed characters for whom playing a game of Russian roulette with a gas-pedal feels like a dose of existential freedom .
There are many ways to make an apartment feel like it has a spring vibe to it .
[ ii ] In § 6 -3 we 'll say more about what sometimes makes a goal feel like a force .
Even Macs have this stupid mouse pointer acceleration , which makes using a mouse feel like you 're dragging it through treacle - and there 's no option to disable it !
The subtitle of this work is for good reason , as it is just filled with trills ( rapid , left-hand embellishments of a note ) , something which even for short stretches can make a player feel like his muscles are being torn out of his arm .
I think that Mayweather is the sort of boxer who can adapt to almost any situation , who has it in him to rise to another level when a fight looks like slipping away from him .
What does a prophet look like ?
Biologists have by now a pretty good idea of what a cell looks like , but they 've had trouble figuring out the magical equations that will explain what it does .
The tacit link between the viewer and the people in the photographs is their shared notion of what it means to be a family - quite literally , of what a family looks like .
On the flip side , he enjoyed " breaking the mold " of what a Jew looks like .
If you wish to see how a nymph looks like , no problem .
And to stick a face in their face and to say , " This is what a daddy looks like .
" and features a photo of a cat looking like it 's ready to pounce .
If you see a girl looking like a fashion model it will not be strange if she has master 's degree in quantum mechanics if she is Russian Russian girls are good mothers and housekeepers .
> > > > So basically if a so-called ' expert ' says a dog looks like a pit bull type > > then there 's nothing that can be done ?
This is more or less what editing a manuscript looks like .
For a lengthier , more complete introduction on how to control what a page looks like , see CZ : How to edit an article .
There 's no denying it , it 's a great design that from a distance looks like a three door but thanks to cleverly concealed rear door handles it is actually a five door vehicle .
She 'll wear any old sweats to work out , then turn up at a party looking like Helen of Troy .
There is also a chance that you kill you opamp because for a while ( until it is charged up ) a capacitor looks like a short to ground , which can overload your output stage ; that damage can be cumulative , meaning the circuit wo n't go up in smore right away , but its lifetime will be greatly reduced .
I normally suggest Google but that produced only 7 hits - though a couple looked like they were people who 'd had contacts with HH so they may be worth following up .
Is the drawing for us or for herself , the artist just wanting to see what a memory looks like ?
The " physical act of playing " and " music theory " 1 ) this is what a guitar looks like .
You guys would really leave a website looking like crappola in IE 6 because your client did n't pay you extra ?
To have the current issue delivered to your home - along with your Fawcett ' this is what a feminist looks like ' t-shirt - join Fawcett today .
" He goes on to whimsically note that if the fly that was in a garden could talk it might say : " I do n't even know what a rose looks like .
We can now see what a baby looks like at various stages of pregnancy .
And to think of what a picture looked like back then to what they can portray in todays society .
You may think you know what an object looks like , but do you really know all of the intricacies ?
When I think about the kinds of jobs I 've had and the ways I 've lived , and still managed to get work done-my God , teaching in a university looks like easy street .
Overview Many people have shown an interest in the Tommie Copper line , and of course when a product looks like it is going to be a success then its not long before it receives some competition .
An enlightening , if disturbing mapping tool helps you see what 2.5 million gallons a day looks like in your own backyard .
romantic comedies today contain but a simple and unique conception of what a woman looks like : a woman who has been willed to be affable and nice .
These first edition criteria are details about what a book looked like when it was initially printed as a first edition .
If you 've been to Benihana or other restaurants where the chef flips shrimp into his hat , or makes volcanoes out of sliced onions and teriyaki sauce , you know what a teppan looks like .
" But that does n't mean that every member of the collective actually knows what a hoe looks like .
Men character created by Hargreaves after his son , Adam , asked him what a tickle looked like : a round , orange figure with long , bendy arms .
Atresia is the blockage of a channel 7 of the body , and when most people in the past thought of 8 tricuspid atresia , they thought of a heart looking like 9 this , where a valve , the tricuspid valve , was 10 imperforate , or " atretic " , this time a Greek word , and 11 the atretic valve blocked the atrioventricular 12 junction .
The top of a stalagmite looked like a modern art carving of a human form .
Even though an orle looks like an annulet on a round field , they are nonetheless separate charges : if this were drawn on the standard shield shape the difference would be given automatically and it is unfair to penalize the drawing when it is forced to be circular by administrative requirements .
Getting rid of the marketing of these foods to children will go a long way in helping parents reset the norms of what a meal looks like .
This would show up as a graph looking like a long tail graph , but on a log-log scale ( whereas of course a power-law is a straight line on log-log ) .
Today most architects do n't have bold ideas that are easily digested and evolve with the time , so every project from a firm looks like it was done by a different firm , so what is the point ?
I also make " this is what an atheist looks like " and " this is what a humanist looks like " to show that marginalized groups in our society are just regular people too .
Or , at the very least , to don a " This is what a feminist looks like " t-shirt .
It would be great if Beyoncé insisted on wearing a " This is what a feminist looks like " shirt on the cover of GQ instead of a thong , but it would be even better if GQ never asked her to wear a thong on the cover in the first place .
A neti-pot looks like a teapot and uses salt water to wash away allergens and mucus , which helps get rid of postnasal drip .
Thereafter , it is a lump looking like it has been chewed for a similar period .
This is the type of truck I think about when someone says Mack , and it is among the earliest memories of what a truck looks like in my mind .
Conformation is what a packgoat looks like .
As long as they pay £ 10,000 , we 'll say they know what an on-switch looks like .
the chipmunk is totally real ( from the official star wars blog : " At first glance , Chris McVeigh 's photo of a trooper action figure riding on top of a chipmunk looks like a well-done Photoshop mashup .
Five We show what the internals of a decorator look like .
At times dance feels very juvenile to me : until we re-define our notions of what dance is , what a dancer looks like and how a dancer moves ; until older , fat and disabled dancers can be encouraged to keep performing and to talk about their lives , the form will remain young and immature .
At it 's simplest the first drop will splash into a glass of water and the result will be a rebound looking like this ( uriblank @ N 05 / 3812002291 / ) .
If you want to check what a document looks like before you print it , you can view it onscreen .
For example , in Medieval Nordic material , a character looking like a lowercase letter Y with a dot and an acute-accent above it may be encountered so frequently that the encoder wishes to treat it as a single precomposed character with one single coded value .
The unspoiled tried to torture the shih tzu to try the lion , at least it was their cucumber of what a lion looked like .
Without Cousteau and his aqualung and his desire to film places and things that no-one else had , would we have reached the stage where every British kid knows what a koala looks like and what it eats , and where people in the hottest countries on Earth are familiar with the shapes and habits of the polar bear ?
Want to see what a Linux on a mainframe looks like ?
" Maybe that 's where my idea of a painting looking like a tapestry came from , " he muses .
" This is what the death of a nation looks like .
What does a survey look like ?
Trust me , our bigger sizes are one hell of a meal and on a plate looks like an awesome meal !
Thus , for example , the request to report longitude and latitude was and a response looked like .
After all , a beemer looking like that would tempt many guys into a rash purchase .
What a pub looks like from the outside is important because it tells customers what to expect inside .
She asked that any active service military person or veteran come on stage to show what an atheist-in-a-foxhole looks like .
But if all you knew was what the outside of an engine looked like , you 'd have a long , long way to go to figure out how you get horsepower out of gasoline .
Andy was brought in to score goals - please tell me how he can do that , when he appears to have forgotten what a ball looks like .
It was around the time of Jimenez 's trip to Morocco that the Moroccan government took the unusual step of expelling a man who had been visiting hotels and garages in various parts of Morocco offering people money if they could claim to have seen a girl looking like Madeleine .
The site is also a short drive from Silves , where a trucker has told police that on May 5 - two days after Madeleine went missing - he saw a woman hand a man a child looking like her [ see further on in this essay ] .
Bruce refers to the schools that he has designed as " experiments " : an acknowledgement that there is n't a single answer to the question : " What should a school look like ?
Provided I know what an elephant looks like , I can choose to imagine one wherever and whenever I want to , but I cannot choose to see an elephant unless one actually happens to be present .
As you are looking on a caravan holiday website you probably know what a caravan looks like so here is a picture of Weymouth beach instead .
What does a blogger look like ?
Follow this with a pratical course so you get an idea of what a colony looks like and what it feels like to get stung :cuss: .
You have to learn what a varroa looks like , but you can just pull out the movable floor and have a look at your leisure , rather than during an inspection .
It has a sequencer that looks pretty much like a printer looks like to a computer .
To see what a mask looks like on any particular adjustment layer , Alt+Click ( Mac : Option + Click ) on the mask itself .
This man knows what rain is , what a dog looks like , what the sky looks like , what a car looks like , what sun against his skin feels like .
In such circumstances we will always attempt to keep the school open but will put a message on the answerphone as soon as a problem looks like occurring .
you cannot describe to a blind or color blind person what a rose looks like in color , you use metaphors .
When I was taking classes in the craft of fiction , everyone-from established professional writers to English professors-recommended that a writer never ever say that a character looked like a famous actor .
And with no previous family experience of university , he and his father thought it might be a good idea to see what a university looked like , so they took a bus trip to Gilmorehill .
We are toothless and Wenger should definately consider either bringing in jet or Vela or a purchase in January as we do n't have a striker looking like they can hit 25 -30 goals a season which is what we need to win silverware .
They had just returned from marauding and were in a pack looking like a gang .
This was the type of red , scaly Demon Brian always imagined a devil looked like , minus the tail , and the hooves .
That is , the usual notion of mimicry involves a simple deceitful appearance which lures the eye into taking the animal for what it is not ( a locust looks like a splinter ) ; yet in the case of the Death 's head Moth the animal mimics the gaze itself by presenting itself to our eye as something that returns the gaze .
Using the logic of the Buddha , how can a doctor perform brain surgery if he does n't even know what a brain looks like ?
What should a church look like ?
The somewhat more important , and unfortunately complicated , part is figuring out what the tree for a file looks like so you can manipulate it properly .
It is also increasingly recognized that if a woman looks like she will put up considerable resistance , most rapists will move on to easier prey , rather in the same manner that a car thief steals cars that are easy to break into .
Who but the taxman really cares whether an org looks like a company , a charity or a little bit of both ?
This is how being attached to a story looks like .
Boston still had a quarter of the contest to force a replay , but it was n't until added time that a goal looked like arriving .
ATim Walker - The purpose of the film room is that a lot of students do n't know what a model looks like when she moves : do they move robotically ?
Another reason was the fact that you do n't get too many carp coming out where I 'm on and at the first sound of an alarm you 're surrounded by others eager to see what a carp looks like !!
So no one thinks a bream looks like this .
Correct me if I 'm wrong but I 'm sure most of the threads you have started are along the lines of " whats best .. this or that " .. and they are usually linked to what a woman looks like Pale or dark skinned Blond or Brunette Stacey from Eastenders or Drew Barrymore Either you have some insecurity issues or are designing a robot woman in a Weird Science style experiment or needing money !!
Archie : Even in 1992 , this strip did n't have a clue what a computer looked like .
A PR firm for the posh estate told Inside Sport that a man looking like and calling himself Rio Ferdinand , and accompanied by a woman he called Rebecca - the name of Ferdinand 's wife - had commissioned a house during a visit on June 25 this year .
I was asked what a hotfix looks like , the answer to that is that it 'll just be a new BOINC version that you can install over the previous installation .
( At one point the first thing that came to my mind was the curiosity to see what the inside of a person looked like ) any way I thought the character was very believable .
A teleconverter looks like a short piece of a lens that goes between the DSLR and the lens .
In this case , however , we just have to look at current practice in Ireland to see what such an approach looks like .
People smoke , we are told , because a cigarette looks like a penis or a nipple .13 Sometimes we are told it expresses parricidal intent .14 Doubtless , the psychologists do have much to tell us that is both interesting and true , though many will find these particular claims far fetched .
So what would a pedagogy and practice based upon such an ethos look like ?
" " My daughter gave me a T-shirt that said , " This is what a feminist looks like , " one of them bragged .
Such an area looks like a silvery-gray mirrored surface , while roughened waters scatter light , giving a blue or black appearance .
Since the / / in a URL looks like a C++ comment , \ / is an " escape sequence " that translates to / .
A photograph of what some think an alien looks like stepping out of a landed craft ?!
That 's why the smoking-hot blonde that does n't even know what a basketball looks like is the betting favorite to win .
Some online simulators , [ 20 ] , [ 29 ] , [ 30 ] , that can show what an image looks like to people who are color blind are also available .
C what a tree looks like a winter .
Have you ever laid down on the grass and looked at the sky and tried to figure out what a cloud looked like ?
A circle looks like a line when a small stretch of the circumference is seen in close-up .
A spiral looks like a zigzag line from the side and as a circle when seen from the top .
If you want to see what an alpaca looks like , it is anticipated that a coach service will be laid on daily from the village of Sixpenny Handley and it is rumoured that the cost will be within most peoples pockets .
Plenty of British people may not know for sure what an elk looks like , but I 've never come across one who could n't recognise , and name , a moose , if only on the basis of dimly remembered school lessons about Canada .
Puzzled said : Plenty of British people may not know for sure what an elk looks like ...
Take a look at India to see what a true corporate monopoly and govt corruption in a country looks like compliments of Monsanto .
What does a church look like ?
Just tried to capture a cloud looking like a massive hawk - you 've guessed I could n't find the camera in time !!
It strikes me that the artist has drawn a picture of what she thinks a face looks like , and not what she is actually seeing .
Nobody knows what a half-dollar looks like anymore , making this analogy completely worthless , so let 's just say they were the perfect size to bite in half , or shove the whole thing in your mouth if you have a giant maw .
To every scenario we say no. We know what a coup looks like , and we wo n't support it .
On the other hand I think most of us knows what a tutorial looks like and links to competitors may be frowned upon .
However , no matter how nice a design looks like , if the form does n't work properly , the completion rates will remain low .
What might a cabal look like , if not incumbents on both sides of the isle allowing each other to gerrymander their districts to ensure perpetual re-election and to fill the ever-increasing government 's budget with earmarks to guarantee an ever-expanding stash of patronage with which to reward their supporters ?
The drawing in the specification shows an instrument looking like a cross between a duty bugle and a vacuum cleaner .
Yeah , because I did n't know what a parking ticket and a letter looked like !!
DAVID Cameron knows what a crisis looks like , having been a key aide to Chancellor Norman Lamont in 1993 when Britain dropped out of the ERM with the grace of cow pushed out the back of an aeroplane .
Your insistence on a binding agreement on all 10 authorities in a referendum looks like a last roll of the dice to get round the fatal obstacle of AGMA failing to get a two thirds majority for TIF if / when Bolton 's referendum goes against you .
When shopping sales , remember that just because an item looks like it 's marked down , you should n't assume you 're getting a bargain .
First one - } } { { Steve | Yeah , so the prizes , Karl , uh , I 've mentioned-there 's a number of CDs , we 've also got Wild Weather , erm , a fascinating-it looks like 2 VHS set about weather , about various weather conditions around the world .
If you want to know what a hypocrite looks like , look at this fellow .
But unlike these other languages , PostScript is a programming language designed to do one thing : describe extremely accurately what a page looks like .
Macromedia really had a strategic change in the focus of the technology plus they had some practical changes as well such as adding accessibility features , adding support for the back button which is crucial for user interfaces , adding standardised user interface components so that a scrollbar looks like a scrollbar which came out to be a really big thing in our studies .
What would such a service look like , how would it be functionally and technically different to an ad or subscription based service ?
' " [ Jeff Williamson ] Namu Amidabutsu : In anime , there 's a standard joke used when a character looks like he 's just died ( of course , the one pulling the joke has reason for being prematurely happy . ) Basically , " the mourner " will bow his / her head , and start chanting something .
I mean , by it 's nature , a rope looks like a worm ...
I think pictures of national news reporters in rain slickers getting buffeted by 80 mph winds to " show " us what a storm looks like are equally stupid .
" pictures of national news reporters in rain slickers getting buffeted by 80 mph winds to " show " us what a storm looks like are equally stupid .
Pushups demand more stability and body control than a bench press , even though the movement looks sort of the same ( essentially a pushup looks like an upside-down bench press ) .
A unicorn looks like a white horse , but it has a little white beard and a long , white horn in the middle of its forehead .
If a passanger looks like trouble , why let him / her in to the cab ?
I will admit under torture that I do not know what a boxer-brief looks like / is .
In a comical scene , a monkey looks like he 's smoking a banana .
It was held that the principles in Aramis have to be applied in each individual case and it is not enough to form the view that a contract of employment must be implied just because a worker looked like an employee , acted like an employee and was treated like an employee .
What 's your prep-work for a match look like ?
How can they focus on their futures without feeling safe and loved at home with role models who show them what a family looks like ?
Basically , this page is a snapshot frozen in time : its what a blog looked like before blogs were invented .
Who gives a crap what a tyre looks like ?!
So I took a break and thought , maybe this would be a good project to put out in the HackTalk name - we revive the distro , tune it a little , and ship it as a hacker 's playground - a plug & play solution for sitting down with Execs , new sec people , or anyone who wants to understand what an attack looks like .
Nothing worse than arriving at a meeting looking like a drowned rat .
uriblank Hard to understand how anybody could happily drive around in a Jeep looking like that , I mean just look at that awful crooked spot light ...
It 's a writing shorthand , a way to do two things at once - describe what a character looks like on the outside and give the reader a peek at what 's happening internally .
We looked up and saw the stock graphic on CNBC and the price of a share looks like it has fallen off a cliff .
What does a plutocracy look like ?
I see a lot ; I see starvation , I see what a war looks like years later .
For those who dont know what a tapir looks like check out this link and imagine a group of these things pulling a chariot into battle .
Educate children about what a syringe looks like and to NOT PICK UP anything that looks like it .
For example , setting an examination looks like a very objective way of assessing whether an individual is suitable to be a judge .
It is called the kitchen tower and is another well-preserved example of what a kitchen looked like in those days , with its massive fireplace .
What did a binder look like ?
wanna know what a cow looks like washed and blow dried ?
This right here my friends is what 10 K a month looks like ...
A fusetron looks like a spring-loaded fuse .
So we begin this episode with Donald driving an RV looking like a nervous wreck through a bunch of rocky , sharp curve roads .
But underneath the promise of a debate looks like nothing more than window dressing .
If ever an insect looked like a cartoon character , then it 's the familiar red and black spotted ladybird .
Soon to be a third year Biochemist , currently learning more than anyone needs to know about what a squid looks like on the inside .
Description : Golden orb slowing moving right , then the loud sound of an aircraft looking like a small plane , though second witness believes it was a helicopter .
What does a license look like ?
The reason a monkey looks like a human is because both have a common designer .
What would such a catechesis look like ?
Pesach for a vegan looks like a lot of unhealthy food basically , meaning a lot of sweets , which is something we usually do not do .
Nothing alerts me more to potential pissedness than a bloke in a suit looking like he 's just been dragged through a hedge backwards .
To create a record of what a person looks like : before the era of photography and film , a painting or statue was a means of creating a permanent record of what a person looked like , and by today , photographic portraits fulfil this task .
A channel looks like a directory path such as ( a meta channel ; all meta channels starts with the prefix ) , or ( a service channel ; all service channels starts with the prefix ) or ( a normal channel ) .
Talented drawing students not only find it fairly easy to make drawings where a doggie looks like a doggie , they also draw the doggie in a beautiful way that transcends mere mechanical imitation .
It was voted second on a 2009 list of the World 's Ugliest Buildings , and from a distance looks like a rocket launch-pad .
For whatever reason , I 've always associated objects looking like other objects , and the image of a hedgehog looking like a durian somehow pops into my mind .
This you can make your self ( after all , nobody knows precisely what a wand looks like close up ) or buy one in a toy store .
" None of my mob would know what a carrot looks like if I did n't dish ' em up now and again .
Then one day , when yet another part broke , and we needed to rewire and re-plumb , and fit a better floor , we decided that when a kitchen looks like that , it 's time to get a new one .
If a product looks like it comes from a far off factory , it probably does .
The first is a shield with a with a symbol looking like an E up against a backwards E. Possibly the customer mark ...
What would such a wave look like ?
They can show what a species looks like and why it is special .
This is what a quote looks like wrote : My marriage was destroyed because I had not yet overcome the influence of sexual immorality , primarily pornography in my life , by which I undermined my own marriage and family .
I thought it was a nice way to get out of your own way as a designer who preconceived notions about what a wallet looks like ... and really listen to the root of your clients needs in order to meet them in a creative way .
This objection may seem trivial to recorders in Britain ( ' all British field biologists know what an oak looks like ' ) , but on a global scale it starts to look important .
3 A. Oh , on various occasions , um , I had been in situations 4 where Army had shot and hit walls or hit the ground , so 5 I knew what a bullet looked like when it struck , you 6 know , concrete or a roadway 7 Q. You have told us the bullets hit the pavement about two 8 feet away from you to your right .
Now if a bomb looked like something unfamiliar and it was flashing bright lights to attract attention , that would be a bomber who really did n't want to succeed , " The Producers " of terror , if you will .
" Come , come on ove ' hee , let 's see what an asshole looks like !
What the silhouette of a pose looks like can be very telling ; if you can read it as a flat silhouette , then you almost certainly have a good one !
A basic methodological distinction explained this discrepancy : microtargeting models required interviewing a lot of unlikely voters to give shape to a profile of what a nonvoter looked like , while pollsters tracking the horse race wanted to screen more rigorously for those likely to cast a ballot .
But yeah as a gun looks like a gun and the one makes bang and the other too throw it all together .
Heart icon , because if you tilt your head and squint , you * might * mistake it for a kidney , providing you have no idea what a kidney looks like .
If you have no idea what a kidney looks like , then tilt your head and squint at the icon - it * might * look something like that .
K : As we mentioned before , the interview process was quite extensive but now that you are past that and a little more settled in , what does your daily routine as a merchandiser look like ?
This report examines what such a service looks like from the users ' perspective .
There is the aspect ratio , the old 21 " CRT was square , the same viewing height in a panel looks like 32 " now .
" Composite A community of flowers on one stem which viewed as a whole looks like a flower .
George Orwell 's becoming a socialist and a plongeur looks like an Etonian response suitable to its day and now planetary concern has a similar de haut en bas commanding abasement .
Tagged as Beef , Cattle , factory farm , family farm , Farmer , farming quotes , food , What does a farmer look like ?
Smith : What does a fish look like ?
However , just because a term looks like one of these examples does not necessarily mean that it is in fact unfair - that will depend on the precise details of the contract as a whole .
The leg of a caribou looks like this and is straight .
" I had been out of hockey for so long I barely recognized what a practice looked like .
In the middle of the night , a man-he looked like a cowboy , Jentz said later-deliberately drove over the two girls as they slept in their tent .
" He went on , " Then a cloud looking like a shield rose up behind him and when it reached the middle of the sky it spread out and then it rained .
" He said , " Then a cloud looking like a shield rose up behind him and when it reached the middle of the sky , it spread out and then it rained .
On a single television at the end , a woman looking like a pseudo space commander from the Star Ship Enterprise goes through the safety spiel of this ' roller-coaster-type attraction ' .
Murphy & Stevenson , Limited , of Belfast and Lurgan , out of the Court of Chancery , and these gentlemen have built on the large field , commonly known as the Holme , a large weaving factory and a number of dwelling houses , and from a distance looks like a village or small town .
A button looks like we should push it ; a door with a handle looks like we should pull it , whereas a door with a plate looks like we should push it .
Also , and this kind of fits into the Spidey sense category , if a record looks like it could have good stuff on it , it invariably does !
A kefta is a meatball , and we all know what a tagine looks like .
Yes , it 's true that I have a passion for food , so one would think that I would be pronouncing my dismay that not every British citizen knows what a truffle looks like , and still more indignation that they would n't know what to do with one anyway .
For instance : ' the moon phosphoresces ' ( fosforece la luna ) ; the snow dances ; a ship looks like a black cross ( la cruz negra de un barco ) ; ' the horizon conceals [ her ] ' ( te oculta el horizonte ) ; ' the afternoon docks ' ( atraca la tarde ) ; and the moon rotates a ' projector of dream ' ( rodaje [ = filming / shooting ] de sueño ) .
It 's not about what a piece looks like or how clever it is in its construction - it 's about what it makes you feel and think .
I have no idea what the hell the driver 's seat of a tank looks like ) of his M 48 and started barreling ass through the jungle towards the sounds of distant gunfire , busting through the jungle underbrush like Ripley plowing the APC to rescue the Colonial Marines in Aliens .
But how does a shader look like .
When you see the size of a microscopic subject quoted as , say - 800 microns in length and 500 microns in width , you can mentally realize this is nearly a millimetre long and half a millimetre across ; if you look again at what a millimetre looks like on your ruler , you will see that a subject ( or object ) is still visible to the naked eye .
Now , I 'm not a big baseball fan , but who goes to a game looking like their team already lost ?
More to the point I have specifically limited the catchment to southern York to avoid an expectation that I 'll cover 40 miles to explain to someone what a wasp looks like !
Report : tried just outside the harbour sat night absolute rubbish not a bite looks like ill have to wait til theres more fish about ive been spoilt in the mersey all winter fish and bites are a bit harder to find down here .
To check what a chlamydospore looks like click here .
Ca n't wait to play this game again to see what a lie looks like on Keith 's face .
As a global shopper you will be able to find sites online with absolutely no clue about what an address looks like .
A sign looking like one permanently at halt was used at the ends of tracks .
Just a guy looking like he was ready to nod off at any given moment .
Like I said , these are very experienced umpires , they are used to seeing what a ball looks like after it 's been damaged by the advertising boards .
Rape is about lack of consent - and this law ignores actual consent altogether , and goes just by what an image looks like .
It was a difficult decision , for I had been groomed as first-class scientist and becoming a programmer looked like a farewell from science .
Food for thought : " When radios first came out , people made them look like churches & fireplaces : nobody knew what a radio looked like .
I am clueless when it comes to handle what is under the bonnet , have no idea how a relay looks like or where do I get a multi-meter ( or how to use it ) , not to mention pulling plugs ...
What a product looks like and how it performs are two totally different thi ngs.I 've said it before watch this space for the " paying field " testers reports .
There is usually a ' Menu ' key between the right set of alt & ctrl keys which has a symbol looking like a menu with a pointer over it ..
I know ' cos I trained them lol , right from describing what a football looks like to Reading are the team in the Blue and White hoops As soon as the gentlemen fly back from Arabland , we 'll all be rescued and Reading will be back in the top flight once again ... once some of the contingent have got their heads out of the sand that was left as a down deposit on Mr Mads ' pride and joy .
A bunion looks like a bump on the inside of the foot where the big toe joins the foot .
But that said , it is important to understand why , as a people , we persist with installing jail-like cubicles in Tirupati , or puncture so many holes into the walls of the Mecca Masjid ; we 're not that bothered as to how a building looks like , as much as we 're interested in what we do there .
The charioteer at Delphi does show us what a charioteer looks like , but also shows the artist 's understanding and interpretation of that charioteer , because the artist made any number of choices to represent that charioteer in that way .
Seguin has prepared a movie showing what an eclipse looks like at one of SDO 's extreme ultraviolet wavelengths : click to play .
( Was this exploded remnant what a mind looked like after a war , I sometimes found myself wondering , or was it the kind of mind that lent itself to a war project in the first place ?
What might a code look like ?
Q What might a code look like ?
" People know that chest pain is a sign of a heart attack , but they do n't know what a stroke looks like , " says Marler .
Except as evidence of what an act looks like .
It reminds me of what a tornado looks like when it 's touched the ground , " Snohomish County Sheriff Ty Trenary said .
Have you ever wondered what an insect looks like inside ?
j , haha people walking by mustve been like - ' so that 's what a poet-funeral looks like .
Because right now what would serving a drink look like ?
What would such a community look like , and what might our role be in creating that ?
If they were going to use young boys like this to protect their borders , then they should take the trouble to explain to them what a visa looks like .
In my experience , if a tool looks like too good to be true , it usually is ; these " magic " tools always take too much cleaning up to be worth the trouble .
Finally , you may be wondering what an SSD looks like and how easy it is to replace a hard drive with an after-market device .
So let 's start by looking at what a tooltip looks like when created using a title attribute .
I did n't even know what a rainforest looked like , and nobody else was studying them , so they said , " Just drive north for a thousand miles and you 'll find them !
Joanne Teal spoke about a qualitative process , but I would like to see what such a process looked like .
See what a color looks like for three floats between zero and one .
What would a sequel look like ?
[ [ scan drawing on page 31 ] ] So now I know what a pike looks like .
No matter what a person looks like on the outside or what they eat , if they have this unhealthy attitude about everyone else they missed what 's really important in life .
We all know how the front of a car looks like a face .
My descriptions tend to be simple and functional-I personally do n't like reading long narrative about what a room looks like or what a character is wearing .
What the city ended up with was a fantastic waterscape turned into a lack-lustre landscape with an arena looking like an IKEA shed with associated concrete multi-storey car park and hotels .
If the book is not a technical one , as long as a longboat looks like a longboat , should n't that be fine ?
The next image will show you what a larva of a brittlestar looks like .
A day will come when the children of Lahore will not know what a pipal or a neem looked like .
But , again , seeing what a form looks like does n't tell very much about what happens once the form is submitted ; it could mean a number of very different things .
This year our TV screens will be blessed by a new Yankee series , ALF , subtle acronym for Alien Life Form who crashes into the attic of your everyday American suburban family and the rest is a muppet looking like the result of mating an anteater with a shar-pei who wears his hair in a duck ' s-arse over his sloping forehead .
That 's what muliple light source shadows on a soundstage look like .
If you ever wondered what a hypocrite looks like , it looks like Paula Deen .
Once asked about abortion , Nixey digs into a manila envelope for a blue pamphlet about " the facts of life , " opening it up and pointing to a picture of what a fetus looks like at six weeks gestation .
" Is this what a recesson looks like ?
Underneath was a pad looking like a checkbook but marked " receipt .
If one does not know what an elephant looks like , the place where the trunk is placed on the skull can be mistaken for a giant eyesocket .
Louie wonders what a beehive looks like and of course it 's Mrs .
You know what a grammar looks like and you have a few clues as to how to program a recognizer for a grammar .
If a property looks like a sore thumb in a nice area , then that is a flag that there might be something wrong .
There are children growing up today who do n't know what a lamb , a pig or a rabbit looks like .
All a slip means is that you need a little more practice handling some particular situation .
I document and then provide testimony to understand the evidence ; in this case what a law means and what financial fraud means , especially with public officials .
Does a smile mean something to a dog ?
The Learn About Clinical Studies page also explains what participating in a study means and discusses considerations for participation .
Being a leader means to take action and take charge .
If Christianity is a faith meant to control moral behavior then what of Islam and Judaism ?
( True , I look away when I have a shot or get blood drawn , but that 's more to avoid expected pain and tensing up with the anticipation of the poke . ) Giving Kayenta a shot means drawing the insulin out of the bottle with a syringe , grabbing a pinch of her neck skin , splitting that pinch of skin , and inserting the needle in that little divot .
Is it the critic 's curse that " reviewing " a concert meant to kindle a spiritual experience minimizes your chances of being kindled ?
Writing yourself a check means you 'll have to wait for the check to get to your bank , and you 'll have to wait for the funds to clear before you can spend any money .
He said that being brought up as the son of a farmer meant the interests of the farming community were " especially dear to his heart " .
To undefine a macro means to cancel its definition .
Redefining a macro means defining ( with ' hashtagblank ' ) a name that is already defined as a macro .
Such a line means that the following line originated in file filename at line linenum .
It the context of marriage , a mushrik means someone who has other partners , in other words : someone who has other lovers .
The Captain Power experiment , a bald scheme to peddle the world 's least fun toys by roping kids into a show meant for adults , was immolated by its own hubris .
I love the fact that Ezio 's ultimate destiny was to hear a voicemail meant for someone who would n't be born for another 500 years .
I got into knitting so that I had a common activity in which to meet more women since being a geek means there are n't a lot of them in my normal day .
Cutting her out of this might have been the best and easiest decision the editor could have made , but I guess her name on a poster means something .
1 ) That old bear mascot looked a lot meaner , they should have kept it .
London will always be a top party city , if only because it 's importance as a city means that so many young , vibrant people end up congregating there .
So , while I can offer nothing about geoengineering , I can say a great deal about atomic energy - and I 've done so in a way meant to appeal to lay readers .
A computer and a modem means that you can access articles , reports and information from all over the world from the comfort of your home without needing to trek to libraries and campuses .
If such a move means you fall off the square , wrap around to the row or column on the opposite side .
To nest a function means put one function inside another .
This icon within a match means GardenWeb and / or its members have uploaded images of this plant .
This icon within a match means GardenWeb members have uploaded opinions of this plant .
This icon within a match means that there is information available at other sites .
This icon within a match means that there are images available at other sites .
This icon within a match means that a plant is available for purchase from a vendor .
For them , a democracy meant centralized power , controlled by majority opinion , which was up for grabs and therefore completely arbitrary .
An injunction means that the people polluting the river have to stop , otherwise they 're in contempt of court .
ANNE KNOWLES : - I think we probably both knew that is what a post-mortem meant .
From your comments on this thread , you clearly believe a change in the political system of a state means a new state has been born .
The planes were on their way to Hawarden Airport in Cheshire shortly after the show when a collision with a bird meant the pilot was forced to make a swift landing .
Eurocrest was not named on the insurance policy as an insured , and noting of an interest means no more than recording its existence .
Having a job(s) mean that you now have money to buy beer , and college means parties , parties and ... well ... more parties .
Nobody is implacable in this debate-being a separatist means you have the future as a canvass on which to expand on your imagination .
yea , its kinda expected though , so many people are told that if you have ' mayo ' on your oil cap its a definate means your head gaskets failed , but people dont realise you can get mayo from quite a few other things aswell !!
* In all of the debates Obama had n't planned to mention climate change once 26 years of the all the scientists only saying it " could " be a crisis , never saying it " will " be a crisis means it wo n't be a crisis , because " maybe " is n't a lie .
Being a collector means something different to everyone , but make no mistake : if it exists , someone collects it .
Therefore enabling a package means loading its configuration data into the appropriate tool , and disabling a package is an unload operation .
I guess having medicine specifically for a condition means it 's " real " in a way that living it does n't .
If the sole paradigm of ' proof ' in mathematics is ' axiomatic proof ' , in which to prove a formula means to deduce it from axioms using specified rules of inference , then Gödel indeed appears to have had the last word on the question of PA-consistency .
Teleprinter systems designers were even more keen to re-use their available keys in clever ways , because the requirement to send their end product down a wire meant they had even less keys to play with ...
Please do not send me a computer generated fax which does not give an alternative means of contact like email unless the machine is permanently available for receiving fax messages .
But being the general secretary of a union means you get face to face with people and you can ask questions that others ca n't .
There is going to be people who will do their greatest to work things out by themselves , while there is going to be people who will desire a brief means away .
You might also wish to specify an alternative means of uploading , such as anonymous FTP .
Trusted Foundry 1 A accreditation means customers can get classified design , verification , fab , assembly and test services from Honeywell .
For her to say it was a surprise means she was not on birth control .
A project means any intervention in the natural surroundings and landscape involving the use of uncultivated land or semi-natural areas for intensive agricultural purposes , including but not limited to carrying out construction works or installations or schemes .
a cappella meant the pope 's castrated team singing organum .
To dream that you help to deliver a baby means that you will soon undergo an important life change .
" The preparation for that first train ride and then the ride itself seems to ground the reality , both for her and for the viewer , of what such an act means -- and like you point out , we see and sense , quite viscerally , this sinking in .
" The preparation for that first > train ride and then the ride itself seems to ground > the reality , both for her and for the viewer , of > what such an act means -- and like you point out , we > see and sense , quite viscerally , this sinking in .
' Course , in those days a casualty mean " dear old bunk fatigue , " so we all did our best to become casualties .
For so long a close companion to soothe her in social situations , a magic means to escape her loneliness , alcohol was now a hardened foe , its vile , irrevocable effects visible to her in the broken lives of the center 's other residents .
A magnitude means 10 times larger .
The AI needed to understand what scoring a goal meant both individually and as a collective and Team Celebrations has without doubt delivered that feeling .
I had my heart set on one with nylon strings for a more mel­low sound , and being a dread­nought means Larissa is a lit­tle too big for me , both in the way she fits under my arm and in the scale length ( mak ­ ing it a stretch on low strings near the nut ) .
Really though , how is a woman meant to feel sexually attracted to an epsilon-minus " male " who ca n't give her a baby ?
Although in everyday usage a theory means a conjecture , in science it means something much stronger than conjecture .
A shutdown means there has been a complete breakdown in this process .
When the Vivak / Luskin story was eventually leaked elsewhere , it was presented in a way meant to shield Rove from the accusation that he deliberately withheld info about his conversation with Cooper .
In order to work as a mainstream means of exchange , Bitcoin needs to keep establishing stronger links with the real world and building confidence in the cryptocurrency among traditional financial institutions .
Go here to see what a thermocouple means in performance vs. a thermistor .
He opens a letter meant for his father and hides in the garden .
Preparing for a child means getting ready for incalculable changes in your life , not an easy task , especially when you are trying to prepare for childbirth .
Consciousness that does not find material expression in an organisation means nothing .
There was a time when seeing Wesley Snipes name attached to a movie meant that you would get something big , be it a big action movie or a big drama , although it did n't necessary mean they were good .
Maxine recalled the days when finishing a manuscript meant hopping on a plane to New York , and meeting her publisher face-to-face to hand it over .
A decrease in the temperature of a substance means that the particles of the substance are moving more slowly .
One is put in mind of the story of the police chief ( I believe it was Chief Gates of Los Angeles ) whose officers were told , when patrolling the red-light district in his city , to drive by v-e-r-y s-l-o-w-l-y and shine their car 's searchlight in the faces of prostitutes and potential Johns , a tactic meant to scatter them rather than arrest them .
' What a designer means by interactive gaming is a bit different .
Heckler ( 1999 ) contends that " WBT courses tend not to be as interactive as instructor-led ones , and the absence of an instructor means that most students will not push themselves as hard " ( p 4 ) .
The reading , one could agree with Barthes , of a classical text has become a stereotypical act : the predictability of the such a text means that the reader is assured that eventually the author 's message will be revealed to him .
No metaphysics as a rule means bad metaphysics .
Heart and Home is a title meant to encapsulate some of this experience , not just as it might apply to Ballinakill and Ireland ( for , after all , Lucy has lived in England for over fifty years ) but to the music that gives life and colour wherever and whenever it is played .
However , the fact that humans are also able to look ahead to the eventual goals of an activity means that students are able to learn enough to achieve their desired exam results , even if their environment fails to facilitate their learning .
Joining a community means you do n't have to register every single person you want to play with as a friend .
Throughout the north of Europe , in monasteries and towns , a bell for covering of fires was in common use ; a regulation which reason cannot but approve , for most dwellings , even those of the higher classes , were built , for the greater part , of timber , the Saxon term for building being an expression meaning to " make of wood .
Usually a modification means a change in what is being taught to or expected from the student .
Similarly , let me disabuse my conservative friends that such a plan means low taxes .
Just like a shiny head of hair means good health for us humans , a shiny coat of fur on a dog means your dog is in good health .
A tone means much .
While the Falcons Parachute Display Team were able to complete a full dislay on the Sunday , the lack of rescue cover on the Monday following a RNLI hovercraft became stranded on a groyne meant no display was possible .
I start with 2 orc boyz as well though , the goblin is a complete waste because if it goes OOA it only counts as 1 / 2 a model meaning you would have to lose 3 models before you could rout 50 % rout test .
The biggest lack of XML 1.0 is a standard means of encoding basic data structures and types used in programming : lists , sets , maps , structs , ints floats , etc. This is why JSON is so popular .
My job as a schoolteacher meant trips were limited to August , the monsoon season for much of the Himalaya , and thus our choice of expedition had been limited also .
I 'm sure Mike Ashley would accept that the fact he did not conduct due diligence on the club prior to a takeover meant he received somewhat of a nasty surprise .
I 'd like to take a stab at answering the question again with this " retro " feminist idea of clothing as a costume meant to influence your colleagues , because I think it 's a useful point of view to consider .
Forcing innovators to change the network in order to implement an application means an end to innovation .
But staying in an apartment means you can shut their bedroom door and enjoy your evening in , and even have friends round for dinner .
This may scarcely seem a fitting theme to introduce in a book meant chiefly for the young , and yet a moment 's reflection will show its appropriateness and practicalness .
Telephone surveys have been a principle means of learning about the attitudes and behaviors of citizens and voters .
Lighter-than-air craft are attracting renewed interest as a low-cost means to maintain persistent surveillance .
If you 're like us , going a trip means a battle between clothes and chargers ( geeky I know ) .
Such a style means , unsurprisingly , that her lectures are always full ...
↑ A phrase meaning they will be covered by shame / embarrassment .
In terms of opening up Parliament , the starting point must be the recognition that uploading material on to a website means that it is in the public domain but not necessarily that members of the public are aware of it .
Having a lane means there 's a well defined border that you should n't breach unless executing a lane change however if you were to straddle one line then there 's a lot of play particularly with bigger / wider vehicles .
The short set of a festival meant their usual fillers could be left out and their cream , the likes of El Salvador and Westside , could shine .
In 17 years of having a Japan address , not once has a letter meant for another address been delivered to me , nor one meant for me delivered to another .
.5 " Permeability " of a space means the percentage of the volume of that space which can be occupied by water .
But when someone tells me that the way I squeeze my nose during a conversation means I am signaling him that I think his idea stinks , how do we verify whether his interpretation is correct or not ?
Several ideas - i ncluding a concept on personal finance for young people , a service meant to match high school athletes with college recruiters , and a site meant for teenage girls - all contemplated whether they could piggyback entirely on Facebook .
No easy answers , but that 's what working on a marriage means .
The most efficient path to happiness in life is to " follow your bliss , " and that is what striving to be a waterman means to me .
I liked the sound of it , even though I was not completely sure what being a mystic meant .
pulling a flanker means trying to get away with something by trickery but I 'll change it I do n't know whether I 'll use this for the current competition , but thanks for helping me improve it .
As it turns out , the higher the stiffness of a muscle , the greater is its elasticity ( resistance to stretch ) ; naturally , less stiffness in a muscle means greater compliance or extensibility ( 17 ) .
It is always possible ( indeed likely ) that if one worked hard enough at it one would find critical settings where effectively chaotic aspects of a simulation meant that usually insignificant difference e.g. the rounding method in the underlying arithmetic or the pseudo-random number algorithm ) could be exploited to result in a measurable difference .
A facade meant to fool the rubes .
Naturally , the nature of the Relics must be appropriate for the formula ; A sword passed down through the generations would be utterly useless for a relic meant to make someone smarter .
That 's exactly what being a student means .
As far as I am aware , there is a fee for this competition but credit cards are not accepted as a payment means .
" But if being a grown-up means planning for the future - in fact , if it means anything beyond marital fidelity - then this is the least grown-up administration in American history .
We ca n't help but wonder if the missing disclaimer on the video was an intentional exploitation of a loophole meant to distance the people behind the ad from its outright lies ?
That title was an achievement-it meant all her hard work , all the loneliness , betrayal and personal sacrifice , had been worth it .
Amidst a host of tough tracks was " Dis Poem , " a number meant to puncture not only the listener 's expectations , but the poet 's pretensions as well .
2 ) A ' B ' rating for an extinguisher means ?
The simplicity of such a model means that only a few parameters need to be estimated .
On PXELINUX , specifying instead of a option means invoking this particular label and causes a local disk boot instead of a Kernel boot .
That a treatment is tested in a trial means it is UNKNOWN if it will work .
So , it is more than a word meaning to make a mistake , as many Muslims claim when they seek to escape the force of these verses in the Qur ' an .
When criminal process in a felony case is accomplished by execution and return of summons , the $ 20 fee applies ; " process " in such a context means a summons , RCr 2.04 , and the phrase " executing and returning process " precisely describes the sheriff 's action .
When criminal process in a felony case is accomplished by execution and return of an arrest warrant , the $ 20 fee applies ; " process " in such a context means an arrest warrant , and the phrase " executing and returning process " describes the sheriff 's action with respect to the arrest warrant .
Levitra and alcohol , altitude points hold gastric petter function treatment to the disease from a entity meant a particular drug .
Some writer forcibly inserted a tumor into it as a cheaps means of " foreshadowing " death .
Four courses a year means $ 12,000 .
" It 's a slogan meant to evoke the city 's rich culture and big business , but it applies just as well to the Texas Exes Dallas Chapter 's 2011 Scholarship Dinner , held last week at the ritzy Belo Mansion .
Cheap cialis australia , also , there are a same life of inebriation variability interviews in which an house means in an perisurgical fecal health , making to not nervous subpage for several features .
A pet means responsibility , even if it is a virtual one .
One of the main benefits of HRO is often quoted as being that it allows HR professionals to take on a more strategic role however , splitting the internal HR service of an organisation means that day to day operations are divorced from strategy and policy direction and are not taken into consideration when planning organisational strategy .
As soon as we got sight of the menu , she was ordering enough dishes to make even sitting at a table meant for six a tight squeeze .
- Moving in a house means isolation from the highly supportive and secure extended family groups and communities .
Pioneers worldwide have recently begun using the water vortex or whirlpool type structure as an alternative means of generating renewable energy from rivers .
A mechanic would n't spend time wondering what a client means when (s)he says « fix my car » .
Being a specialist means we have seen pretty well everything and tackled ...
I know because , I confess , I 'm a SALES-O - PHOBIC ( my own word because despite an extensive Google search , I could n't find a word meaning to be afraid of sales ) .
( 1 ) A reference in these regulations to an injury received in the execution of duty by a member means an injury received in the execution of that person 's duty as a member .
The way police recorded disorder offences for the worst riots in a generation meant only a proportion of crimes were formally logged .
The 4 A part means that at more than 4 A , the wire will start to get hot .
I realize being and independent thinker and not a goose-stepper means it 's hard to organize , but should n't there be some site or another that we can utilize as a " get-out-the-message " sort of thing ?
" The accompanying description : " It is a story meant to inspire action , not just in Town of Pines , but nationally , to ensure responsible and environmentally safe disposal practices , particularly for toxic coal combustion wastes .
That 's not a statement meant to patronize , but there will be people out there who simply cannot get on board with the central principles of taking your time , planning , thinking and coming up with a reaction on the fly as you get rushed by a muton beserker and a cyberdisc suddenly appears in a flanking position .
In France seeing " service compris " on the end of a bill means that a tip is not required and the level of tip left is said to be largely up to the customers ' discretion .
I 'd be lying if I did n't say I agreed to it initially with the assumption that we would quickly grow tired of it and at least the low barrier to entry of a blog meant we would n't be wasting a whole lot of money on the endeavor when we quit after a few months .
But along 18th Street , the heart of Adams Morgan , a moratorium means that the kinds of businesses that might actually mitigate some of these issues-like higher end restaurants-are n't able to move into vacant spaces unless they wish to purchase an existing liquor license , something that can cost up to $ 75,000 in the market the moratorium has created .
These people think being a woman means being a second class citizen .
I guess the fact that it is just wording in a survey means the questions can be simplified .
Being a woman means that one has to hesitate to walk out alone on the street after 9 o ' clock .
Being a woman means that using public transport does n't just involve questions of time or cost .
Now that I have an e-reader , the cover of a book means less and less to me .
From a base mean monthly level of < 10 parts per billion ( ppb ) by volume , by 2000 mean monthly mid-summer levels had reached 40 -60 ppb in these areas ( van Dingenen et al. 2009 ; Hatfield et al. 2011 ) .
Meta without an accent means goal or aim .
For not only at Grissinopoli , but other places as well , occupying a factory meant exposure to the threat of police violence , which was not uncommon .
• Explain what an abbreviation means the first time it occurs : Scottish Arts Council ( SAC ) .
Full age on a marriage meant that they were both over the age of 21 yrs and in fact could be old age pensioners .
Val comes around , replying with a message meant to aid in tuning the color on a television .
In Buenos Aires , Juan Peron presented Cesar with an elaborate scabbard holding a knife meant for use as a letter opener , and gave both actors a miniature sword .
Becoming a parent means opening a door and crossing a threshold into another universe , one from which you can never return .
Send a message meant to persuade people to take a specific action .
Send a message meant to change people 's behavior .
The Imatest program , written by this author ( it 's kept him busy since 2003 ) , provides a staightforward means of calculating digital camera response curves ( log 10 ( pixel level ) vs. log 10 ( exposure ) ) , which are comparable to the film and paper response curves shown below .
To be such a captain means deceiving , betraying the working class .
Unfortunately the thrust of his ministry seems to have been co-opted for the most part by those who would use ' religion ' as a means of mind control and a stealth means to advance the ultimate tenets of the NWO ( Christian Zionism for example ) .
Hence , taking back a move means removing a Black handicap stone , and any White passes needed to accomplish this .
Merriam-Webster 's Collegiate Dictionary has lots of words in it - in fact , the main purpose of it is to tell people what words mean when they do n't know what a word means .
A red card meant you picked again , while a black meant you drank .
Unlike handwriting or the typewriter , entering information on a screen means you can edit while you are making and old marks just disappear .
To prune Marxism to such an extent means reducing it to opportunism , for this " interpretation " only leaves a vague notion of a slow , even , gradual change , of absence of leaps and storms , of absence of revolution .
I think that now , in-the war of the 21st century is a war where you need intelligence to get to a needle in a haystack-that means in the form of a terrorist , that you are looking for him .
Not to mention , your little one will learn that being part of a family means making a meaningful contribution , and doing chores is a great way to do just that .
Among women who consume alcohol regularly , reducing alcohol consumption is a potential means to reduce breast cancer risk .
For example , what a developer means by gearing is not what local government usually understands by it .
Learning a language means that you can do any job you want anywhere in the world , " a school pupil told me at a recent open day .
As a child , I got the impression that being an adult meant responsibility , which implied burden and hard work , and that meant suffering .
The photo above illustrates what the pattern instruction phrase join to form a ring means .
What bugs me most about stuff like this is that , like any artistic pursuit , writing requires one to get one 's " hands " into it - that is , to be a writer means to love writing , which ultimately means knowing the nuts-and-bolts of it as much as it does having a light bulb over your head .
All of the " good " qualities that Fuller touted were in fact all of the undesirable qualities of the time period =A House is a Labor of Love= Buckmister Fuller created a house meant for the future .
The code is not a mess anymore : adding a command means writing a separate new class , and adding a single line in Session in the list of Factory Methods .
It 's not a movement meant to topple the government .
For this purpose , I stuck a pipe meant to support a bird feeder into the middle of my lawn .
Test driving a car means giving your name and number to a sales person .
Creating a system means learning where trails are and developing connections that link them together into networks and where desirable and necessary , building new trails that also connect .
The success of a party means little except when the Nation is using that party for a large and definite purpose .
Or is a Jew meant to live in two mutually exclusive worlds ?
Does for a self mean ( 1 ) that the desire is mine , or ( 2 ) that it is my interest in some future state of myself that makes me care to pull my neighbour 's child out of the fire ?
Adding an application means that the modules defined by the modules key in the .
Removing an application means that the application is stopped , the modules are unloaded using delete_module and then the application specification is unloaded from the application controller .
Restarting an application means that the application is stopped and then started again similar to using the instructions remove_application and add_application in sequence .
An error means something that does not make sense to Linux ; it does n't mean something you do n't want to happen !
The problem with the 8 year old is that a dog approaching on a lead means instant fear ( yes , I accept this and encourage us to walk where dogs are in the hope she improves and yes , I think dogs off leads are fine ) .
Being out of the foodie-loop for a while means that I was n't even aware that another dumpling joint had opened up a number of weeks ago until Libby suggested ShanDong Mama as a post-work catch / meet-up spot with Winston and Dave .
Have you ever gotten a text meant for someone else or sent one to the wrong person ?
A renaissance means , to start again ; to discard the evil , and inhuman , and just plain stupid , and to go back , hundreds or thousands of years , to the ideas which allow humanity to grow in freedom and goodness .
" For Adorno and his collaborators , television provided an ideal means to create an homogenous culture , a mass culture , through which popular opinion could be shaped and controlled , so that everyone in the country would think the same .
I try always to be the first person on the lines in Cogne - being first in the season on a fall means to discover the line again , a venture in the unknown .
In short , having a competitor meant we both pushed ourselves , and the customers truly won .
Working through an intermediary means you do n't have to market as much , but you 'll also earn less money since the intermediary takes part of your profit .
On the left , a complex group formed with a character meaning Wall and , below , the one for Foot in the sense of Stopping .
But I work in the centre of town , and working in the centre of a town means you 're near shops .
To take an " emotional service animal " - a dog meant to comfort you if you have a psychological issue - on a plane , you have to provide a letter from a psychologist or other qualified mental health worker saying you need the critter .
A watch means conditions are favorable for the development of severe storms .
I was really really scared that not having a period meant i should n't be taking Follistim just yet , and " oh crap , what if this is that month that I do n't get a regular period , and now what 's going to happen to my IVF cycle " thoughts were RUSHING THROUGH MY HEAD .
Being an MP means that we have to employ staff , send out letters , travel from our constituency to Westminster and necessarily live in two places .
The fact that it creates a distinction between maternal and paternal copies of a gene means that it must be re-created in each generation .
Theirs is a terrifying quest in a world of wolves , tree spirits and Hidden People , a world in which trusting a friend means risking your life .
My being a princess meant my parents explained this embarrassing illness in someone of royal blood via some elaborate propaganda about fairies and a worryingly non-consensual " awakening " by my arranged husband , but the truth is that medical science came to my aid and helped me deal with my condition .
A deadlock means you 've been through your energy company 's complaints procedure and reached a point where your supplier says they can do nothing more to produce a satisfactory solution .
However , Yurco seems to be unaware of what a synchronism means .
Such a strategy means that if a site is compromised on May 1st but the compromise is not detected until May 12th, the site owner will have pre-compromise backups that can help in rebuilding the site and possibly even post-compromise backups which will aid in determining how the site was compromised .
Finding a solution means finding a sensible way forward .
In any case , programming a synthesizer means adjusting the parameters to get a sound you like .
International Handbook on the Economics of Corruption , Volume Two , is a sequel meant to follow co-editor Susan Rose-Ackerman 's first volume from 2006 , International Handbook on the Economics of Corruption .
I was surprised when I learned that being a mom meant my greatest happiness would be for my children and not myself .
Fi : As someone else pointed out , shooting fish in a barrel means easy .
There is no key that unlocks the mystery of how or what or why a poem means or becomes .
In this early form it also confirmed that an act of kinyan ( coming from a root meaning buying or purchasing ) had taken place .
It just ingests a nothing meaning to see the charge in addition to minimal cost places of interest any kind of time vacation spot .
The Anglo-Norman Dictionary documents bref as a word meaning " short .
A combination meaning " the baker of Aschersleben " is not presumptuous , as there is no reason to expect a single official baker of a city .
A byname meaning " gold " can be found in the 1292 Paris census ( see uriblank ) : .
Lacking evidence that Aibhann Rua is a correctly constructed pre -1600 Gaelic placename or that a byname meaning " red river " or " of the red river " is plausible in pre -1600 Gaelic , this byname is not registerable .
If considered as a descriptive byname , Magnus is most likely as a translation of a byname meaning " great " , such as German Groß .
For some very strange reason , I 'm not flattered when a guy assumes that my not having a dick means he needs to protect me .
America and Europe 's overwhelming desire to declare a deal meant that there had to be a deal to declare .
She did n't just ask what 's your opinion or what does a lot mean to you .
Not only that , when go out with friends or go up to SF to see Jason during the weekends , I get into somewhat of a panic because losing out on a weekend means I just gave up doing at least 6 posts .
" He broke into the movie score business with the 1939 documentary film , The City , a work meant to dramatize and expose the squalid conditions that were prevalent during that era in most cities .
Beckham 's early bath just brings to mind that pivotal Bob-in-the-shower scene : all of a sudden it hits home just how wrong you can be 35 bloody years old is when some people are crying salt tears that an injury means they wo n't have a fourth and final chance to be a world champion .
The immense height of a colossus means it is vulnerable to attack from both anti-ground and anti-air units and structures The heavily armored hull of the colossus carries two powerful thermal lances : one mounted on each side of its body .
The middle class citizen should not assume that an argument means an uproarious procession on the street , rubber bullets , lathi charge and water cannons .
I would feel no sympathy for a supervisor upon whom a young woman was dependent for work entrapping her into a dinner meant to lead to pity sex .
Thursday , May 3 , 2012 - throughout the afternoon THE DARK and LIGHT SIDES OF SEXTING KFWB NewsTalk Radio 980 ( Los Angeles ) The ease with which one can communicate through a smartphone means that some missteps can easily occur .
Once the contaminated food were traced back to the offending source , if it were shown that the problem had been caused because Ma Beedle or Tyson had different views ( than reasonable people do ) on what cleaning a chicken meant , then then the assigned damages would be more severe .
Giving up a duck means that duck will probably be euthanized or suffer .
Having a duck means hearing awful horror stories from everyone around you .
I think the best way to describe [ the interplay between subjectivity and objectivity in criticism ] is to explain what a critic means when he says " this is bad .
Back then , rejection was painful because I thought that selling a story meant something .
Thinking Dan a fellow demon , Nebiros zapped him with a blast meant to drain the Devil 's occult energy , of which Dan , of course , had none .
Reported by the Presidential Administration minutes after the negotiation round was over , it created a storm of indignation among the protesters who felt that even contemplating such an offer meant the opposition 's pursuit of power and betrayal at the expense of people 's expectations and sacrifice .
this describes how the region lock works - so being locked in a region means you must first activate it in that region , then you can use anywhere with a SIM from any other region .
" Trans woman : * presents androgynously or masculinely * Terfs : haha you so obviously do n't pass you 're clearly not a real woman Trans woman : * presents femininely * Terfs : oh my god so you think being a woman means playing into patriarchal beauty standards ?
Clients should not have to guess what an error means .
What a photographer means , what a subject intends , what an audience experiences - are all part of the rich tapestry of expression , reaction and the emotional ' to go ' that drives and draws Natalie 's passion for photography .
A plus means the standard meets the team 's definition of " college and career ready ; " a minus means it does n't .
A zero means the standard needs more discussion .
What could a default mean to the Eurozone ?
No , but being a member means companies receive a 50 % discount of BPF CCA Partner Fees .
For instance people saying " you said x and therefore you feel y " , and Im more of a x means x and y means y .
Unless by chance a man meant by such a statement that in general all things are for the good of the world and for those who are in a natural state , but that bad education or weakness of nature changes the goods of Fate for the worse .
Another thing I want to throw out there : A lot of people seem to be measuring the " reliability " of EBF as a baby-spacing means with " how many months of amenorrhea did I get .
Guardianship of a child means that a caregiver is responsible for the child 's care andcustody .
The country is in a state of trauma under the governance of people who clearly have no understanding that leading a country means being responsible for the well-being of its people .
Thanks to our no win , no fee policy , you will not be charged a single penny for making a claim meaning that you have nothing to lose form making a claim and everything to gain .
The fact is , too many realtors think selling a house means putting the property in the mls , putting a sign in the front yard , getting flyers done for the yard sign and then the buyers will be knocking your door down .
The studying alone kept her busy , but being an orphan meant she 'd little choice but to also pay her own way through university .
The existence of a kink means that uncertainty matters even if ordinarily it would not : " Certainty equivalence " no longer applies .
Basing their actions on anti-Semitic ideology and using World War II as a primary means to achieve their goals , they targeted Jews as their main enemy , killing six million Jewish men , women , and children by the time the war ended in 1945 .
ECB has a powerful advice-backbone which allows defining sets of adviced functions whereas a set means , that all advices of a certain set are always enabled or disabled together .
An anecdote : One gentleman said in a tone meant for overhearing , ' Drinking wine is a great sin ' .
Under AS 15.13.400 ( 1 ) , a candidate means an individual who files for election to municipal office .
Blaustein was quoted , " Showing damage to an animal means there probably will be an effect on humans .
People will tell you what a painting means to them and how it is the first thing they look at when they come downstairs in the morning .
it all down to how dogs are introduced and where , plus hes pretty much learn that a ' Sthille ' and a sit means shut up with that barking and roughousing and get your bum down here next to me .
Kumārila 's is arguably , then , also an eminently fallibilist epistemology , even if it involves a move meant to secure the uniquely authoritative status of the Vedas .
Note that the Easycom protocol does not have a standard means of changing rotational speed .
Honor Diaries : The film Honor Diaries , " a movement meant to inspire viewers to learn more about issues facing women in Muslim-majority societies , and to act for change , " focuses on nine women , Zainab Khan , Raheel Raza , Juliana Taimoorazy , Nazanin Afshin-Jam , Raquel Saraswati , Fahima Hashim , Nazie Eftekhari , Jasvinder Sanghera , and Manda Zand Ervin .
How are you supposed to know what a salesman means when he says the car he is trying to put you in is a direct-injected , turbocharged inline-four with variable valve timing , or has a clean diesel , or is capable of variable displacement ?
The early days of crowdfunding ( in the modern sense using the web as a communication means ) probably starts with Kickstarter.com ( and similar sites ) .
There is just one moon and one golden sun And a smile means friendship to everyone Though the mountains divide And the oceans are wide It 's a small world after all It 's a world of Guiding , a world of fun It 's a world of aims , but we work as one There 's so much that we share That it 's time we 're aware It 's a small world after all .
Being able to bring some relief to them in the form of a fan means a great deal .
Floral fragrances all the way in Germany In uriblank Gifting a flower means reflecting more colors in the already colorful events and precious relations in life .
Clearing a screen means resetting more pixels , albeit done in a single stroke .
We must remember , after all , that being a theologian means being defined by a commitment to a particular religious tradition .
Through graphics , movement , audio and a continuous , engaging presentation of data , video remains a top means of conveying information to an often impatient audience .
As the late great Alan Stang warned , the Tea Party is a psy-op meant to channel the Patriot Movement into the Left VS Right matrix .
Providing a road transport biofuel is the right step and a simple means to aid the poorest people and nations : better still to use the wastes from growing foods in agriculture and farming and animal manures as well as from municipal sources including solid and liquid wastes .
Laguardia 's Cuban Bistro The sister restaurant of Bucktown 's Cafe Laguardia serves up authentic Cuban cuisine in an environment meant to resemble old Havana .
Since Starpoints already have such a high perceived value to guests , the potential to earn more points and to win a vacation means people are happy to go through the steps of linking their Foursquare and SPG accounts .
( t ) " relative " of a person means a person related by blood or marriage or , where the person is adopted , adoption or marriage .
Any remaining certitude about the fact that what is stamped on a note means anything fixed in terms of value was overturned with excessive drama in the famous runaway inflation of Germany after the First World War .
Miss / Mrs / Ms Vikki , Intellectualism can never be devoid of humour , for the denial or irrational exclusion of such an imperative means of expression would itself be unintellectual .
The International Olympic Committee has a long list of stipulations concerning comfort and convenience , and the Munich massacre in 1972 focused attention on the need for a high level of security for athletes ; the gated village format allows for this ( the 1980 games at Lake Placid adopted a novel means of offering secure accommodation by using a newly-built medium security prison ) .
( in an accent meant to be insinuating ) - I am sure you have seen and understood me .
How is a teacher meant to ' read ' the facial expressions of students which communicate so much to a teacher of a child 's comprehension ( or lack of it ) .
( Gaiji is from Japanese 外字 , meaning external characters . ) This allows the encoder to distinguish characters and glyphs which Unicode regards as identical , to add new nonstandard characters or glyphs , and to represent Unicode characters not available in the document encoding by an alternative means .
AT & T EverThere is not a replacement for regular contact with caregivers or access to an alternative means of placing an emergency call .
Beyond the first steps of teaching children to sound out their letters , there is not a lot we can do to help people read better ( which does not as a rule mean faster ) .
This is a system meant for criminals but John Catt has not been convicted of anything and on a trip to London , the pensioner found himself pulled over by an anti-terror unit .
An interpretership means to have to develop ITC competencies .
Also , being contracted to a club means just that - you play for that club .
Apparently , dreaming of a squirrel means that you are a hard worker and should be content with your ' lot in life ' - ostensibly , a squirrel in your dreams is a reminder to be cheerful and persevere .
* * Colly : a verb meaning to make soiled , filthy , or dirty .
Once a Year Means Not Here : prime real estate needs to be used for things that get used all the time .
He said the trial period should be extended , and an alternative means of escape for disabled and less mobile passengers found , before the ramp is removed .
Apparently informing students about the customers of and current criminal investigations into such companies cannot be allowed inside an event meant to inform students about their potential future employers .
While Orange and their network was a big pile of steaming mess ; T-Mobile have been nothing but helpful and have been able to provide a network that works ( when you have a signal - their only problem - at least having a signal means a working connection unlike Orange ) - the people I feel sorry for are the polite and helpful folks in T-Mobile 's CS .
Such an upbringing means he has been dogged by the " posh " tag .
It was the hosts though who started brightly and Exeter could have opened the scoring when Haydn Thomas charged down near the Saracens line but with pressure building a knock-on meant the visitors survived .
2 Focus on your objectives and what message you need to deliver 3 Fully understand the ' mind triggers ' and switches you must activate INSIDE the customers mind to quickly and easily WIN a favorable buying decision ... 4 Getting an edge means doing something different .
It 's hard to say if Protestantism is really anything other than a label meant to identify those whose tradition have their genesis in the reformation .
" Or would admitting the fraud to their attorneys to go all in on a defense mean they need to stop ?
Many people learn to do this via bio-feedback-when you feel a reaction , you imprint a brain pattern and vice-versca and you can ALWAYS change through repetition what a pattern means to the brain ...
We live in a society where being a man means you want a wife .
Just because a symbol means something to one set of people does n't follow that it means the same thing to others .
It is important to check the ubalt.edu account on a regular basis , as e-mails constitute an official means of communication regarding University policies , deadlines and other important student information .
Myth 3 : A relationship means long term commitment Just because you 've entered into a relationship with someone does n't mean that you 're set on the path towards being long term or even getting married .
The tradition of treating non-religion as a non-entity means that we gloss over some significant social issues that diverse and pluralist societies should be addressing .
" The Commission found that such a provision meant there was no meeting of the minds and was thus an illusory agreement .
Bush also promised a " kinder , gentler nation , " a promise meant to assure moderates that he would not pursue a Reaganesque agenda at the expense of the poor and minorities .
A siren meant an exercise , a readiness test or an attack ; one never knew .
A technician works to restore the electricity network near the Palestinian-Egyptian border in Rafah after the signing of an agreement meant to help alleviate Palestinian electricity shortages .
' Avalokitesvara Bodhisattva replied : ' Bhagavan , as an expedient means , they can use various colored materials , and make offerings with various fragrant flowers .
Becoming a monk means to invest all your life in a career .
A loop is parallel unless there is a cycle in the dependecies , since the absence of a cycle means that the dependencies give a partial ordering on the statements .
Furthermore , sleeping at a post meant death for the Roman soldier .
It is a sad irony that a bill meant to expand press freedom could in fact erode First Amendment rights of non-traditional media makers .
His " Paysanne " salad ( which in France would traditionally have warm potatoes and bacon on salad leaves ) turned out to be nothing more than a small garnish of a few green leaves - less than inspiring and " a bit mean really " .
Criticising the scrapping of the education maintenance allowance ( EMA ) , Rebecca Townsend of Lambeth asked : " How can a multimillionaire know what £ 30 a week means to some people ?
Sure , if one of the houses gets totally trashed by a tenant you 'll still need to augment your staff with some contractors , or if a hurricane means you need to replace 80 roofs at once , but you want to have enough staff to deal with the everyday stuff .
On future mobile devices that are meant to be always connected to the Cloud , a plug-in meant for a browser meant to run separately on top of an OS makes no engineering sense .
Science is no longer an objective means of discovering truth , the postmodernist argues .
MORENO Spanish , Portuguese From a nickname meaning " dark " in Spanish and Portuguese .
PORRAS Spanish , Catalan From a nickname meaning " club " .
PRIETO Spanish From a nickname meaning " dark " , referring to a person with dark hair or skin .
Can a wildcat strike by 13 Walmart associates ( sorry , that 's what over a dozen means , if it was more than that give us the precise count and we 'll report the precise number , it ca n't be that hard ) be effective ?
an expression meaning " Good shot " SHOT-OUT The winning shot .
The other part was letting go of all of the false expectations I had placed upon myself about what being a man meant .
For a while the cloud was simply a metaphor meaning " a bunch of computers somewhere else .
It 's not like it 's Spanish or German , where you might at least be able to look over the words and guess - good luck figuring out what a character means if you have no Japanese background at all .
Should a conviction mean life in prison ?
Unless a recovery means " where am I going to find work at age 53 when no one will even respond to my resume because I have too much experience " , I am pretty much experiencing & feeling the recession , not a recovery .
31 % agreed that " including a quiz meant I was more likely to interact with the advertising .
/ We bought because i was not aware of yorkies being in rescues , i thought only mutts , oldies and dogs with problems were only in rescues , i also wanted a puppy and thought they would not be in rescues not to mention i thought a homecheck meant someone snooping all over my house and if it was not posh enough we would be turned down .
Best go an paint mean breeder / owner along the side of my van then !
Project Description : We need a plugin meant for a Wordpress website , for children and parents signing up to activities .
I feel a bit mean dissing the Grosvenor as both times we have stayed they have upgraded us .
There is also speculation that the secretive tender documentation could contain a clause meaning that Siemens may default if the deal is n't closed by the end of August .
The absence of a test meant that bovine TB was not picked up in Liz Ford 's herd of 25 llama at Bower Farm .
Paul 's unlikeliness as a hero means that some routine action scenarios take on a whole different atmosphere .
In 1957 and again in 1963 , the absence of a formal open mechanism within the Conservative Party for choosing a leader meant that following the sudden resignations of Sir Anthony Eden and Harold Macmillan it fell to the Queen to decide whom to commission to form a government .
I think your dealer is being a bit mean here -- it would take them 5 / 10 minutes to check if the unit had broken ?
In addition , although the idea of health-care rationing was dismissed as a myth when the current proposal for health-care reform was first made , we now have ethicists and even the mainstream media admitting that the rationing of health care is not only a present reality of health care economics 2 but also a future means to provide basic care for all citizens .
As I browse the newsgroups and mailing lists , I spot query after query asking where a place is , what a word means , appealing for some explanation of a subject , what happened at a particular battle , is a named town a port ?
It 's called the UrMale ( " Ur " is a word meaning generic ; it 's kind of like a platonic ideal ) .
It is fatuous for the Minister to say , as she did , that a policeman-she meant a police officer , I am sure-will know far more about the person whom he has been supervising than anyone else .
The skilled training officer is able to recognise this immediately and has a barrage of educational weapons at his or her disposal in order to take action to meet the same outcome by an alternative means .
Being a skeptic and a rationalist means seeing criticism as a potential help , a chance to correct any errors in your own thinking that you might not have noticed .
Purchasing a co-op means I pay monthly maintenance fees that go toward my heat , water , taxes and the underlying mortgage in the building .
And this circumstance more than any other , brings the matter home to the authors of this design and their principals , who scrupled neither to set on foot a charge of murder against Athanasius , as a base means of prejudicing the Emperor against him , nor yet to take away from the Clergy of the Church the subsistence of the poor , in order that in fact they might make gain for the heretics .
Or you do it the other way , the Tom Robinson way or the Billy Bragg way -- I 'm probably being a bit mean to Billy Bragg .
It 's a bit mean to let us try out the beta trial then not be allowed to get it !
" Sir , " said Johnson , " if a man means well , the more he means the better .
Oh no , French gameshows are almost uniformly great - they had a cracking version of Deal or No Deal as well , much less serious than ours , although also actually quite a bit meaner - their banker is more of a bastard than ours .
Even if they think there is a serious disagreement among scientists about the right method and its implications , they are still irrational if they decide on a particular outcome and make that the official input to their future decision-making : a disagreement means that one should be extra careful with jumping to conclusions .
There were women and young persons in the throng , and it was for the jury to consider whether Bamford and the people carrying their wives and daughters with them to such a crowd meant to create , on that day , riot , tumult , and disorder ; with such an intention nothing was less likely than that they would carry to the scene those who were the dearest objects of their affection .
In fact , it 's a curious thing that a car meant to be in its retro element cruising the mean streets of New York , or , more realistically , bowling along the motorway , is so much at home on hilly or dodge-about country roads .
Again , a game meant for super slo-mos with the button bashing and the enevitable explosion for the wrong answer .
Sounds exactly like a cult when the term " outsiders " is used Paisley , and I do n't see where being someone who loves a show means they have to fit into some kind of category such as being artistic or emotional .
30 Operating a hoteli meant several commitments .
Homer thus forces Bart to go on an excursion meant to solidify his manhood .
Just as " charm " to a physicist means something quite different than that evoked by memories of Fred Astaire ...
" I thought being a husband meant I was n't supposed to go out with the fellas anymore or get pissy drunk or pull her hair during sex , " he said .
This is not what being a woman means , no matter what the experts say .
Part of being on a team means sacrificing your own ambitions for someone else .
The issue is that satisfying a customer means understanding how they want to be treated interpersonally .
c 3 * 4 * Copyright ( C ) 1996 -1997 Paul H. Hargrove 5 * This file may be distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License 6 * 7 * Original code to handle the new style Mac partition table based on 8 * a patch contributed by Holger Schemel ( emailblank ) 9 * 10 * " XXX " in a comment is a note to myself to consider changing something 11 * 12 * In function preconditions the term " valid " applied to a pointer to 13 * a structure means that the pointer is non-NULL and the structure it 14 * points to has all fields initialized to consistent values 15 * 16 * The code in this file initializes some structures which contain 17 * pointers by calling memset ( & foo , 0 , sizeof(foo) ) 18 * This produces the desired behavior only due to the non-ANSI 19 * assumption that the machine representation of NULL is all zeros 20 * / 21 22 hashtagblank " hfs.h " 23 24 / * = = = File-local data types = = = * / 25 26 / * 27 * The Macintosh Driver Descriptor Block 28 * 29 * On partitioned Macintosh media this is block 0 30 * We really only need the " magic number " to check for partitioned media 31 * / 32 struct hfs_drvr_desc { 33 hfs_word_t ddSig ; / * The signature word * / 34 / * a bunch more stuff we do n't need * / 35 } ; 36 37 / * 38 * The new style Mac partition map 39 * 40 * For each partition on the media there is a physical block ( 512 - byte 41 * block ) containing one of these structures .
The Lebanese government authorized the Army on Monday to take control of the northern city of Tripoli for six months following three days of sectarian clashes , a decision meant to allay fears that fighting in Lebanon 's second-largest city was spiraling out of control .
Whereas a venture-capital deal bet on a new business , pursuing an LBO meant borrowing huge sums of money to buy an established company , typically saddling the target with big debts .
The UK is a just small market for Toyota , joined with our ' britishness ' of not making a fuss means the consumer usually gets shafted .
" I do n't believe a contract means anything these days .
His success as a salesman meant that firms sent him to events in many parts of the world .
Learning a language means learning words , lots of words .
The suckers rally is simply the loading and winding of a catapult meant to throw the dollar upward as the stock market spring unwinds at the moment chosen by the PPT , which moment has already been telegraphed to Illuminist insiders for their continued looting of the sheople and for the filthy aggrandizement of their growing mountain of ill-gotten gains .
Being a witch means you stick to a few rules and live your life in a particular way .
A person means someone who has psychological states and does things ; a thinker means someone who has thoughts : " this having and doing can be summed up by saying that a person owns psychological states and actions " ( p 21 ) .
The Dissemination Service examined a standard means of rendering objects across different repository platforms .
To see large , white snowflakes falling while looking through a window means you will have an angry conversation with your sweetheart , and possibly difficult financial times .
To dream that you cut down a tree means you are wasting your energy , time , and money on foolish pursuits .
Helping a young person to become a homosexual means that he will never be married and never have children .
An alternative means of gaining insight into the importance of different disciplines is to simply ask people who know .
Running a business means you are busy ... and probably have better things to do with your time .
It is an ideal means of revealing the stratigraphy of a place ( stratigraphy : the recording of superimposed layers at an archaeological site , each representing a different period , with the layer at the bottom the oldest and the one at the top the most recent - stratigraphy is most important for settlement archaeology - compare Hemamieh ) .
Running a business means you are busy , it makes sense to get specialist help .
In a rather small place like Iceland , knowing one 's occupation , age , height , sex , residence , in short everything but a name means only that you known the name as well .
On the other hand , using a consultant means you then have the additional responsibility of managing them and you do n't get to develop the skills that you would learn if you did the work yourself .
As each abstract needed to pass all steps , this approach provided a time-efficient means of culling unsuitable abstracts .
So to me , having MO on a tyre means absolutely zilch .
Therefore , saddu ' an sabil-Allah means ; " They turn away from the Way of Allah , " as well as : ' they turn others away from the Way of Allah .
They should add tooltips on the icons as it 's not always obvious to know what an icon means and actually in Windows 8 Dev Preview there 's no tooltips at all .
Anything beyond this point is an addendum meant only for the eyes of a select few : the fellow desperate space sim fans who 're having such extreme withdrawal symptoms from the lack of any new , decent entries to the genre that they 're still considering buying Black Market just for its space simmy promises ( and not the story ) .
It also appears rather out of place in a publication meant to promote journalism .
To " strike down " a law means to declare a law unconstitutional .
Above the religious complex is a site for " sky burial , " a term meaning disposal of a corpse by allowing it to be devoured by birds .
Such a scenario means you " try and do everything yourself " based on the singular desire to save people 's jobs .
A minister means servant , so yes I 'm trying to do that .
A practice means it is something we do on a regular basis .
' I 'm aware a name means squat in this world and Giraffes are tall elegant creatures after all .
So ... to anyone who thinks that my riding a bicycle means i do n't own a car , and a motorcycle , think again ... i pay road tax , i 'm not a hippy , and if you think i 'm an easy target , slow down after you cut me up .. and we can discuss the situation !
But the new dividend they will be receiving of 7 US cents a share means that in total they will be getting £ 3.2 bn a year less than what they were receiving in 2009 .
These include : Shops Duty Free Food outlets Toilets Small play area for children Separate waiting rooms I also noticed that the airport now accommodates and flies to numerous destinations which it was n't well known for before , so this is an improvement meaning more people can access it from various parts of the UK .
I certainly was not offended because I believed I was such a good player that he should instantly recognise me but because surely being paid for sitting in a studio means that knowing players names is not too big an ask !
A commotion means the end of everything .
Those who 're associated with almost any sports as well as who love sports truly they should know very well what a jacket means in any sort of sports or even to a team .
( d ) Whether Tasmanian laws are a proportional means to achieve a legitimate aim under the Covenant .
First , it could be a taking meant to solve the collective action problems introduced by necessary public projects such as highway or oil pipeline construction .
It occurred to me that Hamilton Coe , Junior might be an ideal means of conveying my message to youngsters , contacted schools and youth groups on Craig 's behalf and even sent him some appropriate scripts for such a venture .
But co-organising an event means that both parties show commitment and respect to each other and the event .
Fuzzy logic is a term meaning the logic in a statement is intentionally left vague .
Yet Twelfth Night dwells less on the dangers ( " What a plague means my niece to take the death of her brother thus ?
" [ 35 ] So when Toby criticizes Olivia 's widow-like seclusion , " what a plague means my niece to take the death of her brother thus ?
I think you meant to write , " In a move meant to ELICIT " rather than " illicit , " unless you 're illin ' on the bad puns that will be elicited , thus causing you to come up with the neologism " illicit , " as in " Man , DeRosa 's name be illicitin ' .
" Aye , " said Cohuanacotzin , " and I will go further and say that to think of a man means often that you will come upon him , though you supposed him at the other end of the world .
What an image means , according to Fodor , what it is an image of , will necessarily remain radically indeterminate unless it is pinned down by an associated linguistic description .
The suffix comes from the use of " some " as a pronoun meaning a number of individuals , as in " Some Like It Hot .
How could the Scottish Executive support that approach or an alternative means of providing information ?
You both seem very sensitive to other advisers adding comments , to what is a board meant for comments .
To use a style means to apply that style to an individual widget .
Evangelical scholars have championed grammatical-historical interpretation as an objective means of sifting truth from error .
When it arrived it was not in original packaging and just slung bubble wrapped in a box meant for a large screen TV to which was attached a blue returned product docket with another customers details on it !!
HDFC Residence Loans or SBI Home Loans or any other home loan from any financial institution is taken for acquire or construction of a new house / flat , Acquire an present ( outdated ) property / flat , Extension , repair , renovation or alteration of a property / flat or buy a plot meant for building of a dwelling unit .
If so only submitting an appeal means the ESA carries on being paid .
Public Health is a good place to get some experience although there are few SHO posts and becoming a registrar means joining the career conveyor belt .
For this reason , there is an alternative means for dredger masters and / or mates to obtain a pilotage exemption certificate .
The legal requirement in the UK since October 2008 for Energy Performance Certificates ( EPCs ) when buying or selling a home means that there is an increased emphasis on thermal insulation , especially in new build properties .
The inherent efficiency of a hovercraft means it consumes far less fuel ( and therefore generates less atmospheric pollution ) than almost any other form of transport .
For this they have to clear an exam meant for the same after attaining a certain training in the field of elementary teaching .
Anyway , if being a diabetic means we get ' preferential ' treatment then I am all for it !!
An alternative means of vehicle entry and mobilisation , which does not compromise the vehicle security , should be provided .
Who says having a disability means you ca n't follow your dreams ?
On the whole , being a man means taking responsibility - including for supporting one 's wife and children ( assuming one lives in a normal society where men are allowed to carry out this task without interference ) .
The INT 1 ISR resets the timer on every second interrupt , so an overflow means that the motor is not spinning .
If you are driving a diesel , make sure you pull up to a pump meant for passenger cars as some islands are equipped with larger gauge nozzles for trucks .
I have had mine for 4 months and the screen has now lost its responsiveness in the top half and using it as a walkman means charging daily .
The event of such a dream means that he has now reached a new level of objectivity , and now , he should anticipate wisdom and understanding to a greater level than before .
I feel like having him as a judge means I need to make my entry that much better .
Because to be a scientist means admitting we can never know .
In bald actuality , it is we who assign voices to objects ; phenomeno-logically , the fact that an unassigned voice must always imply a body means that it will always partly supply it as well .
Choosing the Best Type of Child Care Having a child means that there will come a time when you may have to consider hiring a nanny or enrolling your child in day care .
Make up your mind to this : a retreat means nothing unless it is an entire line that is withdrawn or unless the retreat leaves one end of the line " in the air " and within striking distance of the enemy .
" [ 2 ] Specifically , Congress intended the Act to outlaw the practice of requiring otherwise qualified voters to pass literacy tests in order to register to vote , a principal means by which Southern states had prevented African-Americans from exercising the franchise .
[ HJB ] One is only supposed to read the Bible if they have Eddy 's " key " in hand , so as to find out what a passage means .
But THIS D party is bought and paid for. And I 'm sorry but continuing to support them just because they 're running against an R means you keep getting bought and paid for D 's .
Nor does being aware enough to follow a command mean possessing the ability to communicate .
" Interfering with an opponent means preventing an opponent from playing or being able to play the ball by clearly obstructing the opponent 's line of vision or movements or making a gesture or movement which , in the opinion of the referee , deceives or distracts an opponent .
Interfering with an opponent means preventing an opponent from playing or being able to play the ball by clearly obstructing the opponent 's line of vision or movements or making a gesture or movement which , in the opinion of the referee , deceives or distracts an opponent .
The long summer vacations , normally ten weeks or more , combined with parents ' short work vacations of two to three weeks a year mean that families have relatively little extended time to spend together .
In order to find out what an event means it is necessary to be able to read the event structure .
Earlier releases of TWiki only allowed for a single skin , so customising a single template in a skin meant deriving a whole new skin .
I think the variety of tracks in a season mean that there are a number of optimum solutions with the chance of winning , the extremes being Monza and Monaco , both of which have very different engine characteristic requirements .
Can I just ask what sinking a post means as opposed to it being deleted altogether ?...
It is certainly not by chance that the Lemgheity barracks are located in a zone meant to contain large oil resources : in the Taoudenni basin , oil companies are competing to obtain exploitation rights , in particular the Australian company Woodside and the French Total [ 25 ] .
He did not like what he saw , and perhaps we could have a leaner meaner set of officials , more competent and less wedded to " officialese " , where " looking " at a problem means £ 20,000,000 cost and two years of wasted time .
For many people in the community , getting treated for the flu or a sickness means a simple trip to the doctor .
The fact that it was a collaboration meant that both authors took responsibility for the design of the experiment .
Whilst I 'm at it , all of you at the magazine are unbelievably faboyish and think that just because about five hardcore decent games come out a year means nintendo are hardcore , stop bashing people who know this is not true in the mag .
The combination of living in a smaller town , of being the Methodist Minister , of riding sensible ( or wierd ) bikes ( which they are depends on your point of view ) and having a weblog means that it is impossible to be anonymous .
This is a frame meant for all day rides .
In reality , the prospect of getting a patent meant that Hooke had ( possibly exaggerated ) hopes of becoming wealthy from his invention .
JUST being a mason means nothing .
Such thin topics and in this case a rather transparent attempt to reboot buzz for a book meant only to distinguish Gates from the rest of the primary field .
If you are unclear what a question means or how to proceed , you can click on this button for help .
Being an amphibian means that they live two lives : an aquatic larval or tadpole stage and a semi-aquatic or terrestrial adult stage .
Even before the sudden proliferation of private providers , however , unscrupulous characters had been offering shonky courses to mostly Asian students as a back-door means for them to gain Australian permanent residency visas .
Smart cards are a standard means of granting active duty military staff , selected reserve personnel , ...
Six to eight weeks with his hand and wrist in a cast meant a loss of his hard fought freedom .
He returned home to find the family firm of cigar importers , which he had previously managed , to be in a state of financial collapse , and he turned to writing as an alternative means of making a living .
Imperial against Warwick B , the winner finishing second with a draw meaning Warwick B would finish on top due to goal difference .
That they are the theatrical equivalent of God with a capital G. The idea of a dramaturg is simply counter-intuitive for many people ( which does not even for a minute mean that their " intuitive " notions -- about abortion , birth control , evolution , homosexuality , whatever -- are remotely correct .
The deal stems from the Pacific Coast Collaborative , a group meant to organize climate change and clean energy policies .
The world 's largest online retailer has been spending heavily on order fulfillment , a strategy meant to help the business grow , but one that has also weighed on profits .
Matthew ( 1:23 ) cites Isaiah 7:14 7:14 : " A virgin shall conceive , and bear a son , and shall call his name Immanuel , " a name meaning " God with us .
And finally An all-nighter means not having to get up for a wee !
Richard , 41 , added : " To be honest I am glad to see the old splitter back and I do know how much giving these guys a hand means to him .
" guidospeak , she really hedges her bets very badly here when suggesting that Coogan stammering a bit means he 's been gotten by Big PC and their famously powerful lobby ' .
This was all lost in 1996 when a stroke meant he could no longer play the flute , his favourite instrument .
Now as they are LED strips they didnt come with a switch meaning that at the moment they are on all the time when I drive .
£ 15 - £ 20 a week means that by his calculations , taking 50 p off a driver for each job , the driver is only doing 30 to 40 jobs a week - an average of 8 jobs a day .
But I do believe that a guide nomination for a crown means more than a regular member nomination , particularly today when so many members will reciprocate nominations just as they reciprocate ratings .
Chris Wilkinson : Does Twittering and texting during a play mean the audience is engaged or disengaged ?
SL : I see what you 're saying : To have someone like Miles let you know that you 're a composer meant a lot .
Likewise , to make a mixtape meant not only arranging a selection of songs , but ensuring that the recording levels and overall sound flowed from one song to the next .
Ima miss him popping up saying ' cousin I need 2 rest my eyes 4 a minute ' u do n't kno how much a person meant 2 u until they are gone .
Offloading Computation : Cloud computing is continuously gaining popularity and is currently seen as an alternative means for unified data storage .
Ysmir is , according to the greybeards , a title meaning Dragon of the North .
Occupancy or Use at a property means the current legal Use or Uses to which a building and its site are being put .
An injury means taking a break , and runners hate the thought of losing fitness , gaining weight or missing an endorphin fix .
As the man who shows disrespect to the king 's image is punished as if he had shown it to the king in very deed , although the image is composed merely of wood and paint moulded together , so one who shows disrespect to the likeness of a man means it for the original of the likeness .
I agree with what pretty much everyone has already pointed out ( anglocentrism , units , technicalities . ) I thought I would just also point out that perhaps an alternative means of entry could be the min / max .
To many it was a comparison meant to resist any suggestion that pedophilia can be addressed by ending the requirement of celibacy .
And I also say to you that you are Peter [ He uses a word meaning a loose , unstable chip of rock ] , and upon this rock [ here he uses a different term meaning an immovable mass of rock , a ledge ] I will build My church ; and the gates of Hades shall not overpower it .
Thomas School of Law recently developed an objective means of answering this very subjective question .
Through an analysis of a number of agreements , Rhodes considers the extent to which ' a treaty meant what its participants wanted it to mean ' , while nevertheless stressing that these agreements did matter , particularly when they were reinforced by oaths ( p 11 ) .
So , what is a person meant to do ?
Spotting this in Asda , on offer for 75 p a bottle meant I was unable to resist it , after-all I 'm fully aware of the brand that is Palmolive !
Bankruptcy to a barrister means ruin .
For years , using an epoxy meant scooping out some stuff from a tub of goo , then squeezing out a little bit of a hardener from a tube and mixing and using quickly ( while you tried to keep your nose in the next county ) .
In this tutorial , we 're going to make a creative illustration in a style meant for a video game cover or sci-fi book cover .
Here the ' time ' and ' place ' of the title include much local Jewish tradition of the time , which a Christian might not know : what an inn and a stable meant in Palestine 2,000 years ago ; what the Temple in Jerusalem would have looked like ; what a betrothal signified and much more .
Unsuccessfully , since the remnants of a cough mean my voice is unreliable at present .
Many symbolic words are used in the texts : the rose and the nightingale , for instance , symbolize two lovers ; a thirst for water means longing ; a fire means the agony of love .
In fact , the set of concepts ℬ ( G , M , I ) \ mathcal{B} ( G , M , I ) is a lattice meaning that each pair of concepts has a greatest lower bound and a least upper bound .
With Beaz , he had teams where he could have tried ... could have developed a sense of what being a professional meant .
But the edits and cuts required to keep the focus on a character mean you 're never quite getting the visual whole you long for. Watching Jay catch waves , there 's a terrifying angle , the sea seems a whirlpool , then suddenly there he is , paddling through something that seems almost placid .
If a golfer means to use a cart in most rounds of golf , such as at Eagle Nest Golf Club , the cart bag would probably be the best choice .
Of course , given that it represented their first original work in almost exactly a decade meant that it could automatically , and with that authentically be deemed their finest in years upon years , though it was so much more rich and ultimately rewarding than that .
" Having my signs monitored by a nurse means any changes in my condition are dealt with immediately and this has prevented me from being admitted to hospital - in the past I 've had to spend six days in hospital any time I 've been admitted with a chest infection .
Covering my imperfections and being seen to have made an effort means I can portray myself in a certain way .
What I learned is that losing your mum when you 're a child means that you 're scared of getting too close to any woman in case she walks away and triggers more emotional trauma .
The Kansan , instead , took a tip meant to be helpful and made it into a big deal .
To " promulgate " a law means nothing more than to announce it publicly .
They already have the GAAR rule lets them say " a tax means exactly what I want it to mean " so pay up now punk or I will raid you bank account .
To cross at a ford means to attack the enemy 's weak point , and to put yourself in an advantageous position .
Jenny : Joining a department means getting to know a lot of new people and how they get along ( or not ) .
Speaking of " Israel says , " here 's the next line from Reuters : " Israel says an agenda means preconditions .
I 've tried this out a lot meaning to type errors but the predictive txt just comes up with the correct word .
Caucasian hair grows at about 1.2 cm a month meaning that my bride has about 42 months ' worth of chemical and radiological history tied up in her tresses .
" An ordinary resolution of the members ( or of a class of members ) of a company means a resolution that is passed by a simple majority .
Mister Al explaining in detail why using an arithmetic mean to assess the generocity of the banker in any given game based on percentages his offers were of the mean was far inferior to using the geometric mean .
Being a princess meant that she could n't marry for love , but had to marry a prince whose kingdom would be bound to her father 's own kingdom with bonds of kinship .
To this we added refinements such as software recognition of what a batch meant .
We offer two types of maintenance and repair service : PPM - Preventive Planned Maintenance This service is an ideal means of bringing windows / doors up to an agreed , acceptable standard or for carrying out work of a more specialist nature .
if dems want to raise taxes , gaga 's concerts should be the place to start ... over 100 for a seat means they can afford it ...
It 's better to be a bit mean and make the other party truly learn than to be Mother Teresa and shower everyone with all they need .
You see , it was very white and polished , like a thing meant to be kept under a glass case , and the people did not know where it came from , nor what to do with it ; so they put it back into the bandbox and set it on the shelf of the cupboard in the best bedroom , and of course they showed it to me when I took possession .
We might have to consider what a sudden surge in postal voting in an area means and why it is happening .
And what a song means to its singer does n't necessarily or only reside in its words .
Here , we use a novel means of investigating sensitivity to amplitude and phase spectra properties , by using synthetic images of textured surfaces that are broad-band in the frequency domain , and by testing the ability of observers to detect degradations of their spectral content .
A delusion means a belief that other people would regard as unfounded .
Such a barbarian means of transport was nonetheless most necessary ; without it , the round trip would have taken nearer four days than one .
The fact that I 'm missing a leg means that things are just a bit harder .
Aber - as an element means a confluence and derives from a P-Celtic stratum in Scotland ( and Wales ) .
I do n't imagine the extra tap will bother me in the long run , but having a one-tap means of completing tasks would be nice .
Briefly , life has a purpose meaning if and only if it has a purpose that is significant , satisfying , attainable , and plausible .
It has a value meaning if and only if it has value for the person living it .
Lenclud can not decide whether the alien is a demon sent to tempt him or an angel meant to test him , but he can not conceive that it is simply telling the truth : " I am a being from another world .
That 's what a democrat means .
I understand where you are coming from in terms of small things making SUCH a difference , having a lo means lots of planning , even making a cup of coffee requires thinking ahead !
For starters doing free work for a client means you have to work on a project that is of no personal interest for yourself , other than the experience & get motivated about their product / idea .
This place does n't belong to you though it sure does appear to I do n't hate you i feel sorry for you but unlike some dimwits here I do n't think feeling sorry for an individual means its okay to sit and watch them colonise an entire area of the forum and further not be content with that but then try to actually limit what other more knowlegable people may have to say .
Guides spent tons of time and money scouting , setting up tree stands , clearing shooting lanes , etc. Your tip should reflect the fact that hiring a guide means he did the prepwork you could not .
Now Schiffer thinks that the difference between what a speaker means by an utterance of a sentence and what the sentence means is one aspect of a broader distinction that applies to the whole broad Gricean category of utterance .
Just as " That actor has a good walk " means that that actor has a good walk whatever a speaker means by a particular utterance of it , so , say , giving someone the finger means what it does regardless of what a speaker means by a particular instance of it , and so , say , waving a white flag in a certain context means , ' I surrender ' , regardless of what else the speaker might mean by it .
Utterer 's meaning : What a person means by an utterance .
It 's not a matter of convention what a speaker means ; this is a matter of the intentions of the moment .
He ends up calling what I 've put on the board an account of specifically the cases in which an utterance-type means " p " in virtue of its being a ' conventional means ' of meaning that p .
To be a buyer means to conform to the market .
The ' reawakening ' of an institution means bringing this principle back into question in the light of new problems .
( 5 ) " Demonstration Project " means a BIP , or subprogram within a BIP , that significantly departs from these rules in order to explore an alternative means of addressing battering .
Ironically , when I first read that comment ( which , by the way , received over 130 " likes " and over 100 comments ) I had just arrived at the inaugural Dad 2.0 Summit - a gathering meant to elevate communication between dad bloggers and brands - in Austin , Texas .
The existence of an alternative means of travel has allowed common sense to prevail .
" It is also clear to me that this ruling and others like it are intended as a warning meant to silence others in Azerbaijan who would work to defend the very rights and freedoms that the country has committed itself to promote .
Try and imagine a scene meant to establish that hideously unrealistic cliché ' love at first sight ' between two people , as done by a completely talent-free hack who lacks any sense of reality or subtlety .
Does he know what a sect means according to the Hadeeth , or does he classify sects according to his own judgment ?
Their absence sets up a scene meant to remind us that this is a hard-nosed espionage movie .
Why is it important for people to have a shared understanding of what a word means ?
The downside to writing a blog means that I pretty much have to read through most of the stuff if I expect to write more than a couple of lines .
A bogey meant he was still in the mix , but the head was dropping and he would eventually finish two shots back on seven-under .
This new clause provides an ideal means of enhancing accessible taxi provision in these areas .
This two round system will also help ameliorate what is certainly one area that people will have to handle carefully , namely that the potential knock-on effects of a proposal across a region means it is hard for someone to make a case only about one small geographic area .
The poor health sense also occurs ( relatively rarely ) as a verb meaning cause to be / treat as an invalid - often in passive constructions including a " destination " , such as the patient was invalided home , the soldier was invalided out [ of the war ] .
To be a traditionalist means that she holds the view that only those people who are born to families with satanic power and witches in their family background can be true witches Obviously , the Collins family has a long history of witchcraft if she holds this view .
a thresholding means for thresholding said grayscale image data , using said threshold levels , to provide binary image data .
It is true that for the parents the birth of a child means more work , new financial burdens and further inconveniences , all of which can lead to the temptation not to want another birth .
It is a living means of communication , which not only creates a profound relationship between the educator and the one being educated , but also makes them both sharers in truth and love , that final goal to which everyone is called by God the Father , Son and Holy Spirit .
As a reaction to this G-d brought them a trouble meant to bring them closer .
I poke around other people 's affairs now and then , but not carrying a weapon means I think before making trouble .
Review by amazon junkie for ASUS EeePC 2 G Surf ( White ) - Netbook Rating : I feel a bit mean giving it only 4 stars as all the preceding reviews gave it full marks , but I am very pleased with it overall .
Using such a link means you are leaving our site and we take no responsibility for , and give no warranties , guarantees or representations in respect of these linked sites .
· [ 141 ] and in modern English heraldic tradition , a bat means " Awareness of the powers of darkness and chaos " .
Such an exploration means going back to times before recorded history , so it must be highly speculative .
There is a conceptual meaning , there 's an idea meaning to that work , and that has to do with the history of the Five Sisters window , and the implications of that history , the social meaning of the window , the historical meaning , all the labour that went into the window , the generations of people who 've lived and died with the background to their lives being the window .
I was merely joking that it is a variation of colour intensity , a joke meant tongue in cheek ...
To be a pessimist means that you have agreed that human life is an academic matter , so I 'm forced to be an optimist .
It was often suggested by Leibniz 's contemporaries ( and is still being suggested ) that his idea of the sufficient reason of all the predicates of a subject meant that everything true of a subject is necessarily true .
Someone in the commercial says something like " and there 's no arguing with the New York Times , " a comment meant to imply that the NYT is such a great newspaper in terms of its persuasive writing .
A garden as a retreat means a refuge , a place to withdraw from the world .
A garden as an attack means an intervention in the world , a political statement , a way in which the small space of the garden can participate in the larger space that is society , politics , and ideas .
And we need to accept that , for some Diaspora Jews , acting like a mother means keeping Israel from engaging in actions they perceive as harmful to Israel .
He joins the German military ; an error means he can remain there .
However , I would recommend that you re-read what my previous post - a lot means a lot , and 6 or 8 countries does n't mean 6 or 8 people in my book .
A full year travelling with a 1,700 kg Burstner and kit for a year meant a heavy payload , but the Santa Fe managed without a single complaint .
Kaneda is separated from the resistance fighters , but he manages to intercept and hide a pill meant for Takashi , who is recaptured by the Colonel 's men .
Understanding that porn is an industry means that it needs to be needs to be understood as a business , whose product evolves with a specifically capitalist logic .
Every year , the Rwanda Cycling Federation ( Ferwacy ) in partnership with the National Commission for the fight against Genocide ( CNLG ) holds a competition meant to remember some of the cyclists who were massacred such as ; Edouard Gasinzigwa , Théophile Gahutu and Francois Musoni to mention but a few .
It also redefined the meaning of " Fear Up , " a procedure meant to exploit a prisoner 's existing fears under imprisonment .
From their Rainwater which is a Madeira meant to be consumed young through a 10 year old Malmsey and all the way to their oldest and most layered selections , The Broadbent wines were impressive across the board .
The fact that the chap in the passenger seat was an examiner meant the dopey bird behind the wheel was taking her test .
And starting an ensemble meant I was working with people -- well , I went to school with Art at Juilliard , and I went to school with John and played with him in San Francisco .
Maybe that was a lesson meant for the people of Iraq ?
A Letter From Cynthia McKinney ( September 6 , 2001 ) " A respected journalist telling the truth , at risk to his own safety , should not be facing a lawsuit meant to silence him .
I did n't know if I was going to make it out of that place alive , but just the thought that I had a twin meant a lot to me .
Their caution stemmed from their realization that to say that a verse means such and such , is to attribute a statement to Allah !
It takes you from a simple means to gain access to the camera to complex video capture and sharing examples .
Soar - a verb meaning to fly or rise high in the air or to climb swiftly or powerfully !
Levitate - a verb meaning to rise or float in the air , especially as a super natural power that overcomes gravity .
Dive - is a verb meaning plunge head first into the water or to submerge underwater with vigor and gusto .
The flyboarding term that I was unconsciously trying to do is called " dolphin diving " which like a dolphin means you do a graceful dive into the lake , stay under for a second , and then gracefully resurface and do it again - just like we had seen the instructor do .
Perhaps an alternative means of powering the pump , maybe solar panels on roof of gardeners hut ?
He picked up a job with Parvasi - a news-weekly meant for Punjabis in Canada .
But then thought it was a bit mean to curly , besides some people are so thick they would n't get it if you held a big banner over your head and had a flashing light on your face !
I read in a book - please do n't ask which one , I have read soooo many in the last few weeks - that some hives can happily exist with 2 Q and produce more / bulk up the colony quicker etc. They will continue until one dies , then the other takes over - or the book suggested splitting off one in Autumn or ' disposing ' of one - although that seems a bit mean if they are happy ...
" 1 Basically it is a policy meant to keep Saudi Arabia , which has by far the largest known stores of petroleum , under American control .
Going into marriage without a prenup means you are committed to making it work , unless both can agree on a settlement .
It 's a volume meant to be read and enjoyed cover-to-cover , and , with a bank holiday looming , to use .
We are all humans after all but being a celeb means that you are willing to forfeit some of that privacy of yours .
And also Guillermo Ruizlimon of San Luis Potosi , Mexico who wrote : " Being a painter means to do some painting .
Calligraphic marks in the work are made to attach a signature meaning to the composition .
The most important issue is not to use color as a primary means to impart information .
but the school is overcrowded with 1200 students in a building meant for 900 .
" Christ " is derived from the Greek word Christos ( CristoV ) , a title meaning " the anointed one , " which refers to the Hebrew Mashiach ( the Messiah ) .
In Yiddish , this perfect match is called " bashert , " a word meaning fate or destiny .
The nisuin ( from a word meaning " elevation " ) completes the process of marriage .
What does a problem mean regarding human relations ?
Proautophagic drugs : a novel means to combat apoptosis-resistant cancers , with a special emphasis on glioblastomas .
Did you know a score means 20 years and fourscore means 80 years ?
The games people resented the business people for sucking up all of the profits they generated , profits that could have gone into more and better games or just a nicer raise or bonus for themselves ; the business people looked at the games division as kiddie-ware , a stopgap means to an end .
She thinks that just becaue she 's a teacher means that she 's god .
Knowing we 'd be having a baby meant moving into another apartment where the rent is about what our mortgage now is .
Up until a few years ago , I naively thought that buying a house meant paying a mortgage .
Moving to a new area for buyers with a family means that the school can be one of the deciding factors in terms of where to live .
In the United States , there have been several controversies concerning the word " niggardly " , an adjective meaning " stingy " or " miserly " , because of its phonetic similarity to the racial slur " nigger " .
The fact that he 's running a lab means he probably has a well-honed ability to identify research problems worth attacking .
" A write-up means getting disciplined , and too many write-ups can lead to losing her job .
Nails and screws , where used as a fastening means , shal be attached by using brackets on the outside of the enclosure , or they ( nails ? ) shall pass through the interior within 6 mm ( 1 / 4 " ) of the back or ends of the enclosure .
Nails and screws are used as a fastening means for brackets on the outside of the enclosure or where they pass through the interior of the backs or ends of the enclosure .
Nails and screws , where used as a fastening means , shall be attached by using brackets on the outside of the enclosure , or they shall pass through the interior within 6 mm ( 1 / 4 in . ) of the back or ends of the enclosure .
Nails and screws , where used as a fastening means , shall be attached by using brackets on the outside of the enclosure , or they shall pass through the interior within 6 mm ( 1 / 4 " ) of the back or ends of the enclosure .
Paragraph ( a ) ( 1 ) states the statutory obligation of a Federal agency to make information and data available by an alternative means when complying with the standards would result in an undue burden .
If the agency determines that it would constitute an undue burden to purchase an accessible version of such a program , the agency would be required to make the information provided by the program available in an alternative means to users with disabilities .
The National Federation of the Blind ( NFB ) suggested that additional language be added that would require agencies to provide information by an alternative means at the same time the information and data are made available to others .
This paragraph restates the general statutory requirement to provide an alternative means of providing an individual the use of the information and data .
( 1 ) When compliance with the provisions of this part imposes an undue burden , agencies shall provide individuals with disabilities with the information and data involved by an alternative means of access that allows the individual to use the information and data .
But I 've heard that + 3 from a computer means a guaranteed win with perfect play .
Auction - May The Best Bidder Win An auction means a public sale of properties or objects that are sold to the highest bidder .
Given the option to all leave or stay on the show as a duo means he was kicked out .
The Calderdale rivals should have clashed last Sunday , but a wash-out means the match-up at Woodfield will now take place a week tomorrow ( 1.30 ) .
Introducing the Hurricane Electronic Cigarette and PCC Standard Kit ; For customers wondering what a PCC is , it stands for Personal Charging Case , which in a nutshell means that it is a carry case and charger built into one , no matter where you are , this kit incudes everything you could need to make sure you are never far from your next vaping experience .
How curious , the text suggests , the vagaries of words that can , with the shift of a single phoneme or two , mean such different things as " thane " and " thanks " ; with the addition of a suffix or two , turn " thanks " into " thanatos , " or again , with the addition of a word or two , turn " thanks " into an idiom meaning ridge or hollow in the road .
Pickton 's aid and encouragement to an unknown shooter , as an alternative means of imposing liability for the murders .
But what it means in practical terms is that keeping the viewer tuned into a video means earning and re-earning their attention until the end of the video .
The debt consolidation estimate will probably be associated with an e-mail request to partake in a method meant to consolidate and help reduce debts without seeking financial commitment upfront .
Your debt consolidation quote should be associated with a message request to partake in a process meant to consolidate and decrease financial debts without requiring investment upfront .
Of course , that 's from an acute commercial angle , but having a recorder means letting your mouth speak instead of your hands , which can be more spontaneous and lucid .
A simple means where we humbly confess to God 's minister our sins and receive through the priest God 's pardon .
In fact , Shari ' a law ( or Islamic law ) stems from a word meaning the sharing of water .
Content Management Interoperability Services ( CMIS ) standard is a uniform means for applications to work with content repositories .
But I do believe that if somebody comes in with an RFP and there are targeted dollars for a certain region of the State in either DSS or DOL , more importantly DOL , I think those dollars will be getting to serve those clients through an alternative means .
It 's nice to imagine a world in which cracking a case means grabbing a fabric swatch from the crime scene , scanning it with the help of CheekS wab.gov , and then getting a report with the criminal 's name , address , photo , and last 10 tweets .
Whilst it 's a wonderful feeling , being able to make money creating art , it 's completely different than selling a personal piece you previously completed - accepting a commission means entering a temporary relationship with your client .
Before the Doomsday survey , a hide meant ' land for one family ' but the meaning had changed by the Doomsday survey to a number of acres , therefore a hide in 1086 covered , on average , an area of 120 acres , an area that a team of eight oxen could plough in a year , this being considered sufficient land to support a family .
What does being a leader mean to you ?
" non-conforming " as applied to a development means that such development was lawful when it took place but , by reason of a zoning by-law subsequently passed , does not conform to the uses permitted or regulations prescribed by such by-law .
Fox , B 1998 , Using electronic mail as an official means of communication .
Please test in a newsgroup meant for testing , such as alt .
Failure to include a signature means your ballot may not be counted .
The problem is that finding the length of a list means additional traversing of the whole list .
" Meanwhile , Adobe Photoshop software appears to provide an alternate means to embed an ICC profile in a TIFF file ; the compilers of this Web site seek explanatory comments from readers : how proprietary or interoperable is PhotoShop embedding of ICC profiles ?
Although femtocells using a separate carrier were demonstrated to provide a simple means to essentially eliminate interference , many 3 G operators do not have enough spectrum for this to be practical .
He parked in a space meant for police cars after officers invited him to bring in his damaged cab for a forensic examination .
But the taxi driver was furious when a parking attendant issued a £ 70 fine because he was ' parked in a bay meant for police vehicles ' .
The debt consolidation offer will probably be combined with an e-mail invitation to take part in a method meant to consolidate and reduce debt without needing investment in advance .
Stripping a series means running a different episode every weekday , Monday through Friday , at the same time .
There is no such thing as a hot streak or a cold streak , any more than getting 10 heads in a row when flipping a coin means you 've got a " hot thumb .
This includes states of consciousness , of emotion , of personality type etc etc etc Using the IC as a filter means that all information can be turned into IC forms of representation .
Being in a ship attached to a pipe meant there was a natural limit to player [ camera ] movement within the game world .
While I understand that this is a text meant to broaden the scope of roleplaying with the mythos , to carry the esteemed Call of Cthulhu title , it would have been nice to see as many details on the 1920 's as tips on " How this is NOT D+D God Killer Expansion # 37 " .
But often just remains for weeks at a time meaning that l have to plug into an external machine .
Portable or hand-held GPS is allowable on uninspected vessels less than 26 feet of open construction as an alternative means of compliance .
The film expresses Missoni 's sophisticated choice and desire to amplify the role of images , making them a communication means and not an end , instruments for personal forms of appropriation and interpretation .
" To build such a thing means to help your love grow , " he said .
And though with lots of action and adventure , like with X-Men : First Class there 's a lot of wit and humour in a series meant to be friendly to both youngsters and adults .
Knowing from the beginning that there are three previous survivors of an epidemic means the reader knows the first two searches will end in failure , muting the suspense , particularly when the quests themselves are not particularly interesting , or cleverly portrayed .
The prospect of playing alongside Tim Duncan and Tony Parker , and with Gregg Popovich as a coach means Kobe can potentially walk away from basketball with a ring .
Let me explain a little on what does an action means in WordPress .
' Journey of Ayurveda ' travels in time from its origins in India to its progress into the 21st century , where Ayurvedic medicine is gaining international interest and respect as an alternative means of caring for physical and mental health .
That 's what a grant means in this context .
And it 's much harder to shirk off training if missing a session means letting your pupil down !
While traditionally this functionality was combined with the Member Service role , e.g. becoming a member meant receiving membership updates , in this setting this functionality is decoupled .
Being a stripper means stripping .
Such a type means that we retrieved a value of type through some IO actions .
Being a monad means you have access to some syntactical sugar with the notation .
However , instead of recounting the hours of worship , Packard reflected on what the chapel as a building , as a being and as an occupier means to the Colleges .
It entails that there is a motivated and specific relation between what a word means and the form in which it is phonemically displayed .
As a hiring manager , a degree means very little .
" This is all a deception meant to cover their primary program of population reduction .
Reducing heat losses from a home means less damage to the environment and lower heating bills .
1.4.58 " Watertight " in relation to a structure means capable of preventing the passage of water through the structure in any direction under the head of water likely to occur in the intact or damaged condition .
Whatever reactions one may have to the effect Twitter may have on the operation of one 's brain , one can see from Marieke 's usage of Twitter and related applications , that it can be a powerfil means of sending immediate and immediately readable messages about reactions , resources , what will happen next , etc. It also permits quantative evaluation of the event involved .
A geometry means the rear wheels will be aligned first , followed by the front .
Communication and mathematical skills are encouraged well across all subjects , but occasionally teachers miss opportunities for pupils to use information and communication technology as an alternative means of recording .
I discovered the butterfly valve in the exhaust was seized shut meaning I was running on one pipe , so I sorted it out so it 's now stuck open which as a result means it sounds damn fantastic everywhere , even crackles and pops a little on the overun .
But to mobilise such a force means adopting a socialist political programme to address the burning social issues of land ownership and widespread poverty and unemployment .
Being in too high a gear means the car can speed up on it 's own , causing the need to brake , so gears are a good way of maintaining a particular speed .
A blank means that a particular cell in the table is impossible .
Show a leg means either ' make an appearance ' , usually by getting out of bed or at least showing willing by poking your leg out , or it means ' hurry along ' .
In fact , a table of eight persons arranged in a circle means you have a greater , NOT lesser , opportunity to mix than in long tables when you can speak easily only to adjacent diners and perhaps three persons opposite , if you are lucky !
" His writing students use horror , the most recognizable genre of the survival story , to examine how the structural elements of a work meant to build suspense are no different than those of an academic essay .
· Young Justice : In Young Justice , being a teenager means proving yourself over and over - to peers , parents , teachers , mentors and , ultimately , to yourself .
Adding a link means that there is only one source file in your project , but you have two entry points for them .
There is a standard meaning that 3 has that 4 does not .
It 's true that : There is a standard meaning that 3 has that 5 also has .
Building a web means expending energy at some rate , Pe .
Although this type of discussion is commonplace in our classrooms , Michael 's background as a philosopher meant that the event had me thinking about the issue in new ways .
Unfortunately her lack of understanding of the media and her horrendous handling of a crisis means she only has herself to blame in this circumstance .
Therefore expect a number of shots of women in states of undress , seemingly there just in case you were n't sure what Asao thinks he 's missing out on , as they usually appear in the daydreams he has ( in his head a first class ticket on a plane means the stewardess strips for you ) .
During an epoch known as the First Occasion ( zep tepi ) , mythical beings referred to as the wrw n wrw , a term meaning the Eldest of the Eldest Ones , or more commonly the Primeval Ones , gathered here to perform magical rites using power objects , called iht , in concert with the functions of the bnnt-power object .
This falls short of what we would expect in a message meant for the world that was issued from Hiroshima , a city that has suffered the ravages of an atomic bomb .
Such a word means much more than it says , makes me , still alive , play a ghostly part , evidently referring to what I must have ceased to be in order to be who I am .
When I was a kid , I used to think that being an artist meant being somebody who did something artistic , like painting , sculpting , or writing .
Sizing up an employee means a persistent but friendly conversation -- pushing the limits of the conversation as far as they go , and gathering information .
" But even as he made the offer he appeared to dismiss the possibility , describing his enemies as al-Qaeda operatives who did not understand what a truce meant .
To ay he was a genius means he never wrote a bad song right ?
Abiyo Kamilla Both of you , make sure to try the above on an not-networked or otherwise protected system , not on a system meant for production , neither currently , nor further on .
Learn what a word means before you use it , Mr Press Release Writer .
To give a fig means to care , in that not giving a fig means not caring .
You must have more bishops than any other player to keep the archbishop , a tie means that no one holds it and it is remains out of play until one player has more bishops than any other player .
In Russia , a female gamer is seen as " very cool " and being a gamer for a girl means that the guys will actually treat her better " As one of them " .
Does the fact that he was n't charged with a crime mean they do n't believe the most serious charges ?
If there is a risk that the member of the public will disengage without giving sufficient information to enable agencies to investigate concerns about a child , the NSPCC national 24 hour Child Protection Helpline ( 0808 800 5000 ) and ChildLine ( 0800 1111 ) can be offered as an alternative means of reporting concerns .
Depositing your resource with an archive means that they will catalogue your resource according to appropriate standards and thus make it possible for the existence and availability of the corpus to be discovered via these mechanisms .
Five kinds of error are reported by Inform : a fatal error is a breakdown severe enough to make Inform stop working at once ; an error allows Inform to continue for the time being , but will normally cause Inform not to output the story file ( because it is suspected of being damaged ) ; and a warning means that Inform suspects you may have made a mistake , but will not take any action itself .
If the user selected the ISO leap rule as an " experimental " option in Kalendis then the Symmetry date would have a drift-free relationship to the Gregorian , ISO , and Western Bahá ' í calendars , with a calendar mean year of 365 + 97 / 400 days .
A migration means exporting your data and importing it into the new database , finding updated versions of all your extensions , modules and plugins and upgrading each in turn , including all the corresponding data ...
Using a checkpoint means sacrificing valuable seconds , which will also likely cost you a medal ( gold , silver and bronze medals are awarded based on your race time ) .
When big sister DJ calls the Tanner clan for dinner , the adults realize they should probably take a break-which means wolfing down their dinner to maximize playing time .
If the total rise exceeds 2 m , an alternative means of access ( such as a lift ) should be used .
- began to dance a cueca , our national dance , dancing all her immense solitude because she was dancing a dance meant for a couple .
After the two legs against Asante Kotoko ended all square , a mix-up meant the Ghanaians never learnt of the rescheduled play-off in Cameroon - leaving Englebert to pitch up alone and thus ' win ' the trophy .
The next task is to find out what the present-day followers of the tradition of a myth mean by it ( the process of hermeneutics ) .
( 9 ) Principal market for a security means the single securities market with the largest reported trading volume for the security during the six full calendar months preceding the week in which the Rule 10 b -- 18 purchase is to be effected .
For such a reduction means that the world of the senses drops out of our relation to the divine .
The IMS Learner Information Package ( LIP ) is a specification for a standard means of recording information about learners .
Portia 's husband announced one fine day that he did not want baby Amanda anyway and the fact that Amanda was a girl meant she was useless for the farm .
Here 's a handy tip : if you do n't know what a word means , look it up .
This product is meant to be used as a set of Halloween lights in a dry area , not a flashlight meant to be abused thrashed , and trashed .
" PARSIN is a noun meaning a half-mina ( 25 shekels , or about 2 / 3 of a pound ) .
Furthermore , many of the diseases which can be prevented by vaccines depend on herd immunity-they work mainly by preventing a disease from settling into a reservoir in a population-which means that if enough people in any given group are unvaccinated , the disease can spread .
This progression from the patriarchs to the resurrecting of man , is a step meant to mature us from relating to God as a " personal " God .
A government means the personnel of the government .
Being a Druid means composting vegetable peelings instead of sending them to a landfill ; it means walking or bicycling instead of filling the air with tailpipe fumes ; it means buying groceries from local organic farmers instead of from multi-national agrabusiness .
An installation means a database directory and postmaster port number .
It 's not that Harlan is cutting us off at the pass or saying we are not entitled to ask ourselves what a story means .
I can imagine such a person thinking " If being an atheist means calling religion a scam , then that will mean separating myself further from the people I love , and I 'm not willing to do that " .
This is a squad meant to be together .
If this is true , then becoming a man means rejecting all the traits most closely associated with childhood-and which all too often are also associated with ' femininity ' - and adopting behaviour and practices regarded as manly .
I 'm right off the beaten track , and delivering a letter means he has to negotiate a bumpy drive and faff about with a three-point-turn in order to leave - and all this just to deliver junk mail , which I screw up and throw away half a second after he 's handed it to me .
The folding scooter is created for urban commuters as it can be used as an alternative means of transport or folded down to take on a bus or train .
Alienation therefore is " the obverse of self-realisation " .79 Moreover , the ends of production are alienated from workers and capitalists alike , and the act of producing becomes for both groups a mere means to maintain their existence .
But , charging for the lavvie for a quid means I wo n't buy any £ 5 cans of lager .
Thank you , too , to the Tablet for publishing this much-needed corrective to an out-dated view of what Love and Marriage are really all about - not necessarily the propagation of Children , but maybe paving the way to an alternative means of nurturing them in a loving partnered relationship ..
Working in a consultancy means that you could be dealing with around half a dozen clients at any one time .
It is more than that , the fact that this particular tree is being hidden in a forest means that it is really hard to find the right container and bomb it , unless you bomb every single container you find , and I can confidently say whoever your enemy is , he almost certainly has more containers than you have bombs .
" Just being in a region means that you pick up local intelligence on interesting companies , " he says .
Also , killing a fox means that another fox may move into that area to replace it .
Conventional truth is an expedient means to achieve ultimate truth , and the Buddha described conventional truth as truth to suit the mentality of ordinary beings .
But it is clear that the Cartesian view of the body as a machine meant that the body became another object in nature , open to investigation like all others and , above all , open to the application of his method .
This , too , seems arbitrary , although it makes sense as a step in an argument meant to show that " if ( or insofar as ) Western political leaders are intending to frighten people for their own political advantage , then ( to that extent ) they are committing the same core wrong that is distinctively associated with terrorism " ( Goodin 2006 : 2 ) .
To understand a proposition means " to know what is the case if it is true " .
An alternative means of protecting information is via quantum cryptography , in which security is founded on fundamental principles of quantum physics , rather than on computational assumptions .
And there are other times when a rest means stop the bass note from ringing .
If you rely upon a root mean square error ( RMSE ) or a correlation coefficient ( COR ) value to justify your choice of a best fit , explain how you know these values are within the limits of acceptable error .
It does what you expect it to do , it shows picture that you tell it to open , as well as some mild photo-correcting tools - nothing major , but you can do Red Eye Removal and correct some Contrasting issues on your photograph , a nice addition to a software meant for just viewing photographs .
A forfeit means you give up something for nothing .
Sponges are those who earned their jobs by passing a test meant to limit supply .
The death of a pet means the loss of a non-judgmental love source .
Being playful in a conversation means playing in and among the linguistic and social structures that constitute the conversational context .
As usual , the presence of a link means you can click through to the image(s) or page(s) ; the absence of a link indicates that we have not yet photographed the work(s) of that artist in our inventory , but we would be happy to do so on request as time permits .
The lack of a lens means you do n't have to worry about misting up , but some people say that looking through wire mesh affects your ability to skirmish .
Interpreting what a word means is automatic , so overriding " fish " with " pig , " say , likely takes a split second .
Biblically , baptism is an ordinance meant for those who acknowledge their unworthiness , not for those who have demonstrated their worthiness .
In the ancient historical and cultural context in which Genesis was written , to be the " image " of a deity meant to be his earthly representative-to function as his visible figurehead on earth .
I know the 10 p is a bit mean concidering current fuel prices but equally the £ 550 is quite generous .
fortunately i know that we are all agreed that it is wrong it is heartwarming and so encouraging to know that i am not alone in thinking that a comittment means just that take the good with the bad thats what any relationship is about whether you are engaged married courting or whatever marriage is a comittment no greater thing in life should mean so much its a pity some think it counts fpr nothing when it suits them !!
They do n't travel awfully well - changes in temperature can mess with them quite easily , and the fact that you need to apply them with a brush means that you ca n't just pop it loose into your handbag if you wanted to .
When people ask me what a song means I do n't like to answer them .
Taken to an extreme , a few dozen constitutional law scholars may find it only slightly unbearable that they cannot agree on a specific means to achieve progress goals .
The Canadian government 's ban can only represent a defeat for those Islamists who regard the wearing of the face-veil in the West as an outward display of sharia law as well as a barrier meant to separate Muslims from their Western societies .
There is no way to get rid of the International Symbol of Access , but we should agitate to get rid of it as a symbol meaning accessibility for every disability .
Surviving a recession means learning to swap the sugar rush you used to get from a spending spree for the lasting satisfaction of managing your resources effectively .
And whilst I 've fully retired from local politics , being an alderman means that I still maintain some links with the Guildhall : I receive council minutes , get invited to the Christmas dinner and mayor making and I can sit with the officers and guests in council meetings if I wish .
In other words , the first test of the main group cannot be said to be a " real test " because it is not designed to test their knowledge , but rather used as an alternative means of stimulation .
A Sikh means to live as a student , the first Sikh guru , Guru Nanak a teacher and student taught others the importance of meditating on the name and vibration of god in the early ambrosial hours between 3:30 -7 am .
It has a special meaning yes .
One is aimed at the insurance companies , forcing them to pay the federal government for the privilege of selling health insurance - an ironic touch for a law meant to make health coverage cheaper .
Back in my heyday , finding every single item / powerup / sidequest in a game meant literally probing every corner , x-ray-scanning every wall , equipping a thief in every dungeon , etc. Now that I can so easily just look up anything I want , I usually do n't even bother .
Failing to identify all the deliverables when you start a project means that you 'll generally miss at least one important deliverable while you 're busy working on things that provide little benefit for the customer .
" Nor can I think of a word meaning " the state of being a cheapskate .
Sometimes a hairstyle means more than a fashion statement .
Luckily for Rich he managed a pot in the third game as three in a row means everything off !
Completing a quest means that the quest is marked as complete in the player 's Pip-Boy -- but it will still be running unless you use a StopQuest command to turn it off .
It 's a voice meant for tumbleweeds and melancholy and doomsday weapons , not a guy sitting around his one bedroom apartment in sweatpants , eating stale butt ends of wheat bread and angrily shaking his fist at Drudge Report headlines .
As the game unfolds , it becomes clear that this Calamity was the result of nationalism , xenophobia , and war-the handiwork of a weapon meant to wipe out an entire people .
The U.S. should also remember that having an ally means being an ally .
Let 's say being a genius means being # 1 .
The fact that a ride on Chaos can last for quite a while means that there is a sense of " all being in it together " , as we 're asked to put our arms in the air if we want some more , and 48 hands duly reach out and grab a slice of sky .
Remember the time when reading a book meant smelling the ink , touching the paper flipped between your fingers , falling asleep with your favorite novel by your side , having a deep emotional connection to that object hiding wonders between its covers ?
Getting to go to so many events in a year means we get to see a load of amazing speakers every year from across the globe .
To him , having overwhelming evidence for a position means you do n't have to say you believe .
However Celebrity is a bit meaner when it comes to storage space .
From 1951 to 1961 his job as a lagger meant he was exposed to asbestos on a daily basis .
Risk-mitigation strategies that were employed by the region 's populations are evaluated as a principal means of addressing how different populations sought to cope with the impact of climate change , alongside persistent cultural changes associated with anthropogenic phenomena .
The young man , who later gets punched in the mouth , says being a man means standing up for what he believes is right .
I guess because being in a garage means that prospective theives could work on nicking it behind closed doors , and you or passers-by are less likely to notice anyone trying to pinch it .
" The thought of a parallel means that as there is an external action , there is also , in the case of the believer , an internal , direct action , the external action merely confirming the internal , provided that it actually exists .
A period means the test is OK , F means there was a failure , and E means there was an error !!!
With over 20 years now of travel and music experience , Sam originally started in music travel back in the late eighties and early nineties when contacting a hotel meant sending a telex !
However treating waste as a resource means that manufacturing industries based on the recycling of secondary materials could lead to considerable growth in manufacturing in London .
It would be nice if a recession meant we will all soon be reading smart books and driving hybrids to meet our loved ones on time at the soup kitchen , where we will be volunteering .
It culminates in a terrible ending where the film tries to leave the audience with some lesson about what all these various glimpse into a family means .
I have used a bicycle as a principal means of transportation in the Boston area since 1971 .
( In the desert context of these passages , inhospitality to a stranger meant certain death . ) For example , Ezekiel writes , " Behold , this was the sin of your sister Sodom : she and her daughters lived in pride , plenty and thoughtless ease ; they supported not the poor and the needy ; they grew haughty and committed abominations [ sexual orgies to bring fertility ] before me .
The ' casual ' use of language in an email means that without the context of the message ' thread ' any one email can be meaningless .
Darren , Ok so you know I am a telepath You assume BigTed meant B & Q jobbies , I assume he was using this as an analogy meaning all jobs are the same .
Totally agree Tommy , a green flag to a driver means one thing , race .
Not sure of what a word means ?
" Besides " is usually an adverb , which is probably why most people do n't use it in this phrase , but it can also be used as a preposition meaning " other than " .
Living a century means seeing the changes humanity and science develop .
Tiffany Aching finally gets to start her witch training and in the nick of time too for she is hunted by a hiver meaning to take control of her mind .
He gets a lot of press for being " right " which for an economist means he 's making a lot of money right now .
I did get a job , but the symptoms continued for a while meaning that the illness had to be now solely physiological .
At the grammar schools this was a principal means of cultivating the best articulation both of the classical and vulgar tongues .
They seem to think closing any route to a woman means it 's not a real matriarchy when patriarchies in the real world often close out possibilities to men .
A correlation means that the two datasets vary at the same time , it means that when there are more cosmic rays , there are more clouds , and vice versa , however it does not necessarily imply that there is a relationship between them ( both things could be caused for example by the sunspot number , very unlikely ) .
His " Conservatism " and his " Christianity " are just meaningless labels designed to throw doubt and confusion into the matter rather than serving as a short-cut means by which to accurately describe the general positions of the politician .
In fact , Rogers situation was far worse , because an oversight meant she did not receive the pregnancy supplement that - at the health board 's urging - was provided from local municipal funds after the province cancelled a $ 37 monthly payment in 1999 .
Over the past 20 years , these developers have crafted the art of the football management game , to the point where a review means nothing to the millions of fans that love this franchise and buy it religiously .
While the recognition of a promotion means a lot , Rochelle has already begun to feel the pressure .
And she would hunt for any one with a shotgun meaning each fall the phone would go off the hook what the folks dog-less customers calling to reserve field days with her .
A record means nothing .
First , the idea that there 's enough fraud out there to make their anti-fraud efforts a primary means of solving the health care crisis is patently absurd .
The real question here is of which is better : a black market which leads to only a few having guns and SERIOUS penalties if you are found to own or even posses one without the correct documentation OR a country where everyone and their bloody grandma can access / own a gun meaning that EVERYONE is a potential threat .
The President has left it undefined , but he 's made it clear that this will not be an exercise meant to move on a level that is not comprehensive or fundamental .
Missing a period means you are pregnant .
Being off by a degree means that the solstice date could be off by 10 or 15 days .
We got through Barnsley without even noticing it and whilst some might say this is a good thing , finding a cafe means coming off route .
How 's a dog meant to express that .
( b ) The term " governing body " as applied to a city means the mayor and council or mayor and commissioners , as the case may be , and as applied to a township means the township clerk , the township treasurer and the township trustee acting as a board , and as applied to an improvement district means the board of directors of such improvement district acting as a board .
" To me , being content with a situation means that I 'm perfectly at peace with the way it is , and I never expect it to change nor will I work to make it change .
Coming to terms with a situation means that I accept it , but I do n't have to always like it and I do n't have to be passive about it-I can work to change it .
The inspection department hesitates to call it a failing grade , but agrees such a rating means the bridge " is in some state of deterioration that we want to keep an eye on it .
Although Nepali Congress party won 196 seats in the Nov 19 vote to select the 601 members of the Constituent Assembly , the lack of a majority means a coalition government is all but certain .
Taking the van in for a service means a couple of hours you ca n't be at a customer working , and therefore earning .
The worst part of this change is that before , having a house meant a driveway which meant easy and private place to clay , wax and polish the HELL out of my R !
Buying a franchise means you can tap into existing assets and experience , saving huge chunks of time hence saving you money .
We hear this over and over again , not as an argument but as an assertion meant to close off argument .
On a strategic level , having total control of such a form meant the design could be progressed with absolute confidence .
So far , so good , but it 's a bit mean just to send one ATC in a swap .
The circular motion of a turbine means it must be as tall as it is wide , a geometry ill-suited for a channel that is wide but shallow like many of those identified in the DOE report .
Assistance should be seen as an alternative means of keeping the peace , far less costly in both dollars and human lives than military engagement .
Book haram should b careful in this their so called redemption struggle by making sure that innocent civilians do n't get caught up in their stray bullet ( though we knw dat fighting a war means casualties ) .
In the end fasting is a tool meant to show us that it is the mercy of God that sustains us .
The key disparity here is that you are assuming being a " leader " on a project means you were a project manager or officially managing others in some formal fashion .
Finally , Rhodes & the 10 ¢ Punk went against HHH , Shane & Batista , all of whom tagged themselves in as a win meant a shot at Orton .
To a designer , what a thing means is as important - sometimes more important - as what it does and how it does it .
This implies that nephilim , a word meaning the ' fallen ones ' , or ' those who have fallen ' , was the original name given by the Israelites to the fallen angels .
It 's supposed to be a touch choice - do you suffer the hardships of turning your back on a program meant to help you , or do you take the government handouts you 've railed in the past ?.
The possession of a territory means a very real autonomy , security and control over an animal 's means of survival .
Due to an error on the part of the The TeaParty.net Leadership Fund , a check meant for Georgia congressman Tom Price went to North Carolina congressman David Price .
Bennett traces our problem to what the ancients called acedia , borrowing a term meaning " an aversion to and a negation of spiritual things .
In our time caring about a place means watching it change .
Being a Leftist means never having to say you 're sorry .
Your debt consolidation quote will be accompanied by an email invitation to participate in a plan meant to consolidate and help reduce your debt without needing financial investment in advance .
He thought that 's what writing a report meant - copying the dry words somebody else ( an anonymous someone at that ) had already written .
" We have previously stated , however , that " [i]n the context of insurance coverage , an accident means an unexpected happening without an intention or design .
7 / 4 / 2005 Samantha Cronier Grabs the Gold Ring at the Annual C-Ring Banquet In days gone by , grabbing the gold ring on a carousel meant you won a free ride .
Living at a distance means we only see each other every so often , and as he is no longer freelancing much , having moved up and out to a staff job at Blizzard Entertainment ( talk about top of the food chain ) , I see him less often than I even used to .
The vacancies may come up part way through a term of office and co-opting a trustee means that there is no need to wait until the annual general meeting to fill the vacancy .
Research tells us that being overweight as a child means you are more likely to be overweight in later life , so it is critical to encourage healthy eating from a young age .
Fielding such a team means we are underrating west ham and believe they pose no threat of their own .
The change can take the form of structural , process , organizational or a change meant for cost cutting .
This is the same problem we have had for a couple of seasons , the opposition can just wait for us to blow ourselves out secure in the knowledge that a goal means at least a point .
A genetic perspective on developmental disorders confirms that they are complex and heterogeneous disorders , and provides a novel means for identifying coherent subtypes .
Her training as a scientist meant that she did not enter the educational field with any pre-conceived ideas about how to teach , but , instead , followed the actions of the children in order to better understand what it was that was motivating them .
Taking in a lodger means giving up some of your space and privacy .
And we 're also saying particularly in terms of Lottery funding , the BFI should no longer assume that successful return on a movie means that the Lottery money comes back directly to the BFI .
" The Pacific Islanders Cue , " Anohui " a name meaning " Patient and Persevering " Pro 9 Well Ron we are very happy that you decided to put your beautiful wood creations into Pool Cues !
To say what a symbol means is ' to give it an interpretation in terms of other symbols ' , but that will not quite do .
If the branches extend a bit meaning it is filled with moisture and prone to support a christmas decoration .
Too is an adverb meaning " excessively " or " also .
Trentadue : Well it appears , and first of all , I agree with you , it 's a sad state in our country 's history where to voice an opinion means you 're attacked from one side or the other .
Haha , I just wrote a post about whether being a mum means that you have to like all children ( after an encounter with a brat throwing balls at a play centre ! ) .
First used as a term meaning a ' scurvy fellow ' , or a ' rascal ' , the epithet ' scab ' is recorded as in use at least as early as 1590 .
When you want to check the battery or make some very simple changes to the settings it takes forever finding where you 're meant to go - for example setting an alarm means you have to go through four different menus .
" While clinical use is still in the early stages , breath analysis devices could be seen in every GP 's surgery , as a standard means of diagnosis .
She had a bad night with baby and brought that into the edit suite , which is a total no no. Editing one-on-one with a director means you have to hide your mood or it distracts from the job in hand .
So 0.08 would be the decimal representation of this just as a number meaning 8 % should be the displayed value .
Some people feel that forgiving a friend means that they are letting them off the hook for what they did , but that is n't the case .
The dwarves charged into Hindral and Klaus blocked a blow meant for Hindral 's chest , Hindral swung ( rolled a 98 ) and swung again ( rolled a 04 for 11 damage ) and swung a third time killing his opponent ( 14 damage ) .
And Father Wolf taught him his business , and the meaning of things in the jungle , till every rustle in the grass , every breath of the warm night air , every note of the owls above his head , every scratch of a bat 's claws as it roosted for a while in a tree , and every splash of every little fish jumping in a pool meant just as much to him as the work of his office means to a business man .
There is little guidance available on what an establishment means , but in simple terms it usually refers to a unit which is fairly autonomous .
In the central universities , the administration , despite its obstructionist approach , is still seen as a structure meant to facilitate and support the teacher .
The ability to zoom in a lot means you can read the text even if it 's too small and you can also zoom into individual frames .
Bloom 's Taxonomy is a standard means of categorizing cognitive tasks by complexity , with the simplest ( Knowledge , or " Remembering " ) at the bottom and the most complicated ( " Creating " ) at the top .
This is where things get tricky , however : the ink itself has a secondary function as an alternative means of travel for your secondary form as a squid .
Unless you are absolutely certain that your audience knows what an acronym means , either avoid using it or be certain that you have defined it in the text e.g. Securities and Exchange Commission - > SEC ) .
So having a fanatec means that you have such an advantage that the game thinks your cheating ?
Making an appointment means you will treat it like a firm commitment .
It is advisable to ensure that a conservatory is not constructed so that it restricts ladder access to windows serving a room in the roof or a loft conversion , particularly if that window was designed as an emergency means of escape in the case of fire .
I will leave it at that as I think I made it clear I meant no offense , that and I do not want to start an argument on a forum meant to assist people .
In 1884 , Hans Christian Gram developed the staining technique which bears his name and is an early example of using a chemical means of differentiating bacteria .
A state means that file has been removed , or never added , for that revision .
" It is by no means clear that a headache means a state of mind with a headachy object [ i.e. an act with a certain object ] ; it seems on the whole more plausible to say that that it is just a headachy state of mind " ( 1921 b , p 392 ) .
IMAGINE if writing a poem could put you in prison for years without charge or trial ; if voicing your opinion meant putting your life and the lives of your family in danger ; or if writing an article meant you had to flee your home and move to another continent because a bounty has been placed on your head .
Maybe it was n't shoot to kill , if it could be avoided , and being hit by a dum-dum means your chances for survival are a lot slimmer .
Shots ring out one winter night and a bullet meant for a local street dealer kills a ten-year-old boy .
While we would like to have a volunteer head-count as soon as possible , we understand that life as a student means your schedule from one month to the next can be unpredictable .
However , it was n't very long before upgrading a cpu meant buying a new motherboard .
Creating a habitat means recreating the key aspects of the topography and substrata .
We 're talking about a therapy meant to rebuild parts of the nervous system , so it 's always possible there will be unexpected side effects .
Being a parent means putting yourself in the background once in a while , something the Allens and Farrows seem incapable of .
Creating a brand for your livestock is an essential component of 21st century marketing , and breeders who do n't attend shows , need to find an alternative means of making an impact .
The good thing about having it as a layer means that you can keep changing it when you like by dbl clicking it .
But a deal with the Lib Dems on scrapping the 50 p rate for those earning more than £ 150,000 a year means that process could be speeded up - with the threshold hiked above £ 9,000 on Wednesday .
A stereotype means nothing to him .
A rise in the index reveals that the environment for creditors to collect their debt has worsened , whereas a fall means it should be easier for them to do this .
So because you have a pram means that everyone has to jump out of the way for you ?
As long as Bubbles Greenspan kept the pipe full , all that a default meant was , you got to sell the house again at a higher price .
Such a condition means contentment and happiness .
For generations of Madagascans , the prospect of using a latrine meant confronting superstitions and changing traditions-not an easy task .
Robben : Has the talent but a combination of his injury record and being a twat means I do n't want him .
Obviously , I am entirely at one with the Government , given that we have worked so hard under successive Governments to come up with a novel means of helping people with water bills in the south-west , but it would be helpful to know why clause 1 made no provision for parliamentary scrutiny .
A virgin means a pure one .
To redevelop a piece means to move it to a better square after it has already been developed .
Will there be an open-subject means of conversation ?
Typically , legal proceedings begin with an investigation meant to collect evidence , followed by a trial that establishes whether that evidence meets a criterion - " beyond a reasonable doubt " in criminal proceedings , and " according to the preponderance of evidence " in civil proceedings ( in the US ) .
It is concluded that midwives need to understand what an episiotomy means to women , and that through research midwives need to develop their own body of knowledge of childbirth from the viewpoints of those who are actually experiencing it .
Hyperspace as a word meaning a space of more than three dimensions was coined in the 1890 s by mathematicians , who were exploring the geometries defined by Bernhard Riemann ( 1826 -1866 ) which were not only non-Euclidean ( with any degree of warping -- called " curvature " ) , but also were spaces of any number of dimensions .
What has held content providers back is a well-justified fear that publishing a video means you lose control of it .
Our brain saves and stores all the words we learn during our lives in our memories which then allows us to recollect what a word means without thinking about it , but a person who is having difficulty remembering words or confusing their words could have a problem that is associated with their memory .
A moratorium means that the ethics of cloning are up to debate .
A moratorium means that President Bush 's statement that , " Allowing cloning would be taking a significant step toward a society in which human beings are grown for spare body parts , and children are engineered to custom specifications ; and that 's not acceptable , " 46 is nothing but empty words .
Two million people in the space of a week means we 're talking about exactly that - people .
( 8 ) For the purposes of this section , " the Step 3 income " of an individual means the individual 's net income less allowances deducted at Step 3 of the calculation in section 23 of ITA 2007 for the purpose of calculating the individual 's income tax liability .
Not so much a path of carefree discovery as a gruelling means to an end , borne with a disarming smile and remarkable lightness of spirit .
He claims that being an atheist means he does not worship gods .
If murdering a person means the killer can , should or must have taken from him what he took from his victim , then why does this equivalence apply only to murder and no other category of crime ?
We each carved out our own existence on campus but the fact that we were there consecutively for a decade and a half means we all have common experiences .
Former ICA Boston assistant curator Jen Mergel was recently appointed senior curator at the MFA , a position meant to bolster the museum 's commitment to contemporary art in its new wing .
But to Deng , now raising her three boys and three girls apart from her husband , a job means not only providing for her family but also a chance to help her support her 17 - year-old sister , who still lives in Sudan , get a better education .
not having slavery as an excuse means that racism is contemporary and still effective .
To say that nucleophilicity follows basisity across a row means that , as basisity increases from right to left on the periodic table , nucleophilicity also increases .
Having a filter means that your PR agent puts forward the good ideas , representing you in the best way possible .
This book is a good illustration of how rich MMS is as a communication means .
There 's also a bit of misunderstanding when it comes to exactly what does an individual meant on doing you harm look like .
She does not see the hard truths of what being a warrior means .
This is not a site meant exclusively for software professionals and business analysts .
The fact that carbon dioxide is a gas means that it must consist of simple molecules .
On the other hand , our strategy of concentrating on discussion lists and a website means that anyone can join in .
To tie a parcel meant shredding a piece of publisher 's rope , or sacrificing one 's braces , or searching for a multi-knotted scrap of string saved up from the last incoming package .
Meanwhile , the Tobacco Industry and Marketing Board has proposed that buyers exhaust the local crop before importing burley tobacco in a move meant to save the sector from extinction .
Rooney 's been s * * te and Heskey is Heskey , what 's a winger meant to do ?
Using an apostrophe means " it is " which does n't make any sense in that sentence .
This total signal integration method eliminates the effects of differing detector response times , particularly in multi-collector-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry ( MC-ICP-MS ) , providing an alternative means to quantify transient signals .
With a week to go before Afghanistan 's presidential election , escalating violence across the country risks undermining the credibility of a vote meant to mark the first democratic transfer of power in Afghan history .
In the case of part payment , the person using the Gift Voucher will be required to pay the outstanding amount of the purchase by an alternative means , for example , cash or debit or credit card .
It seems bildr has permission to grab Sparkfun data so what 's there probably was n't put there by Sparkfun themselves , just a fast-track means to get some data into the site .
Having a vasectomy means that you are fertile and do not want children or anymore children , .
What being a subscriber means is you will get email updates in your inbox whenever new posts go up on Amish America ( usually a few times a week ) .
For the siblings , who were raised by their grandparents and lived on Van Buren Street , owning a home meant life stability .
Being a prick means you should retire or get in another line of work .
She was probably just being polite by asking permission first ; it would be a bit mean to deny the request in that case .
However , having a nutritionist means that many questions are easily answered , and you can be confident in knowing that you are doing the best for your body .
Where else could anybody get that type of info in such an ideal means of writing ?
A watch means it could happen .
Subsequent bankruptcy of an attorney means that they cannot act under a Property and Affairs LPA , but can still act under a Personal and Welfare LPA .
Of course , being a celebrity means people recognise you in the street and ' being recognised ' is the every-day occurrence and proof of celebrity status .
If it is madness to have faith in what the ancients knew , it is a madness natural to human kind , not a Sending meant to deceive us .
The character is formed of a pictogram meaning rice and another meaning steam or vapour .
Being a designer means being passionate , constantly improving and wanting to learn more .
The fact that the State provides a service means that , unlike the market , its provision of the service is completely separated from its collection of payment .
Perhaps that is what Being a friend means , After all .
' Proof of concept ' is a typical supported activity : verification of a concept or a principle means proof of a certain method or a hypothesis as a demonstration of its feasibility or a demonstration of the purpose , which then verifies that a certain concept or theory has the potential to be useful .
Use of these powers would provide an alternative means of securing site approvals .
Reclaiming words is not really about changing the meaning of that word for the whole of society , but it is about injecting an alternative meaning and complicating the word .
The value of doing preliminary research - before committing to an expensive career programme - lies in each spouse 's definition of what a career means to them .
If being a parent means doing everything you can to protect your child and see that it lives in a safe and loving environment , then should n't all parents be crazy environmentalists living the most eco-friendly ' green ' lives they possibly can ?
If handing out 4 beta test machines at a show means that the MicroDigital machines are shipping then , to apply the same analogy , the drobe.co.uk team have stopped the greenhouse effect by not driving anywhere today .
So a censure means very little , and Knotts ' response affirms it .
An asterisk means " any number " .
Given that it is so amazing is one thing , but that it is a charity means that the money they raise can go towards worthwhile causes and the constant improvement and upkeep of the site ( there are over a million plants and flowers on site !!! ) .
To be a migrant means to be an explorer ; it means movement , this is our shared condition .
For many artists over the centuries , the answer is yes : a picture of a city means a picture of crowds , human interaction , voices , meetings , hustle and bustle .
Accept it and plan an alternative means of delivering this service .
Individuals who are associated with any sort of sports and also who enjoy sports genuinely they should determine what a jersey means in any kind of sports or even to a team .
People are stacked on top of each other in crowded cells , with forty people in a space meant for ten or so .
A lien means that someone owes money on the vehicle .
Leasing a vehicle means that you make monthly payments to own the vehicle for a certain amount of time .
jpg I am able to surmise that the L means it was made in 1854 and that the JAMES DIXON & SONS means that it was made after a certain date but the omission of a trumpet means it was before another date .
A Triple A rating means that the County can invest in our roads , buildings and bridges to ensure a strong , safe infrastructure and that it can build and maintain state-of-the-art educational facilities and communications networks at lower costs to taxpayers .
When there was no wind to power the sails , a steam engine was there as an alternative means of power ... flour taken across the yard to the bakery adjoining the house ...
This sticks because one bright spark worked out that on the basis of 7 1 / 4 hrs + winding time the extra 1 / 2 hour at time and a half meant that he was being robbed of about £ 1.30 so made sure he always stopped a good 5 minutes early .
My work schedule , our new afternoon class , and our new study approach along with football 3 nights a week means a very tired mom .
If anything , not having an office means there is fewer line items in the company 's tax forms .
Getting a PhD meant a lot to me too , as the first in my lower middle class white family ( extended ) to go to college .
" For , " she said , " the Goddesses created the races as a balance-a means of keeping each other in check .
Id die for her and that coming from a man means a lot .-
Also i thought the law regarding buying online from a business meant the buyer has rights ?
The more exacting requirements of performing to a script means more mistakes , because you have something to deviate from , and so forcing more takes .
A relationship means that there is emotional content and time to make a partner comfortable .
What an image depicts depends on what an image means .
Good m / m romantic suspense about a closeted NYPD cop , whose boyfriend was killed by a shot meant for him and who has been working too much in the years since then , is sent by his captain to a timeshare in Tampa on vacation to avoid burnout .
I can be mindful and present while I 'm cooking , but how do I be mindful and present while I 'm writing an email , or figuring out what a chart means - things that require full mental attention ?
As you can see it 's doing a darn good job , and the fact that I rarely have to save a comment means it is actually very accurate , at least as far as this blog is concerned .
Today 's lunch was spent making a deck for 1 of the hulls , unfortunately doing it a bit at a time means I have to make up the colour each time so I ca n't guarantee matching the colour , but soon I 'll be able to colour match things as well .
So fair warning : I only want two kinds of email : those from people I know , and those from people who have taken the time to find out what I 'm interested in and composed a note meant to appeal to that ( I love those emails ; indeed , that 's why my email address is public ) .
At least they think they are ; my dictionary notes it as a colloquialism meaning the British colloquialism cheerio .
a method that goes beyond the old rules of competition and cooperation to combine the advantages of both toward a highprofit means of leveraging business relationships .
When delegating a task means you develop someone else or give them an opportunity to shine , it is a win-win for both of you .
An " unintended engagement " resulting from such a failure means " the use of force resulting in damage to persons or objects that human operators did not intend to be the targets of U.S. military operations , including unacceptable levels of collateral damage beyond those consistent with the law of war , ROE [ rules of engagement ] , and commander 's intent .
" Shifting the mindset to using thought leadership as a foundation means that you 're developing expertise at the core of your business : through your products , service , technology , and more .
Jesus ' parable radically enforces what being a neighbour means .
To address the increasing fishing pressure , the CFP evolved from a means of allocation to a crude means of conservation .
To say that the worker is a worker means to say that he is a degraded human being , and to say the latter is to say that he became a degraded human being as a consequence of the forms in which society has developed .
To say you need a crisis means you 're willing to suffer an awful lot of pain and cost .
That is how a poem means .
Any move with a mortgage means that you will have to renegotiate and refinance .
Secondly I hear the matches can be quite long is there a minimum of what I could expect as being a father means I could be on between two hours to 10 minutes at a time depending on if she wants to sleep or not .
Canadians have less knowledge of what being in a sorority means so they constantly revert to stereotypes and automatically judge .
Our fisherman friend Chris Dunn , the weatherman at Phoenix channel 5 KPHO-TV has posted a synopsis meant to help long range anglers concerned about Hurricane Hilary .
His exclamations hold a clarity meant for the audience alone , and so Ang Lee dumbs down a moment of spiritual transcendence for fear that it may not translate to all .
Being a boozehound means making a lot of simple syrup .
Passing a test means that we can get beyond it .
He once said : " An oven means cooking and cooking means women and that means brain damage .
Although more rigorous testing is needed to understand the relationships between these constructs in the online context , their findings provide evidence that marketing organisations have a sound means of evaluating the effectiveness of their online advertisements .
Email : a dedicated ( emailblank ) was a core means of contact for requesting units to be set up , for seeking technical assistance , and for escalating problems being experienced .
The allied email address has been a core means of rapid communication to solve problems and establish units .
On the day of House passage , FitzSimmons introduced an amendment meant to strengthen protections for Minnesota churches that do n't want to perform gay weddings .
All children are NOT " gifted " ( a term meaning high IQ , atypical learners ) .
" People with autism are taught that a smile means someone is happy , " Hoque said , but research shows that it 's not that simple .
Gay as a noun meaning " a ( usually male ) homosexual " is attested from 1971 ; in Middle English it meant " excellent person , noble lady , gallant knight , " also " something gay or bright ; an ornament or badge " ( c .1400 ) .
This sheet provides guidance on these matters , where the intention is to replace ladders to sea with an alternative means of descent to sea .
Replacing ladders with an alternative means of descent to sea which leads to an increase in the total package of risk is not acceptable .
Creating a video means you can post it to your website or blog - to give it that * live and personable * feel , but you can also post it to YouTube ( like this one is ) , Vimeo and other video sites , to extend your audience reach .
That you need a human creating a report means you are probably doing it wrong .
Anyway the fact that it has such an impact means that it is no surprise that many superstitions both in the form of wives tales and personal have evolved around the subject of money !
All I 'm seeing in this thread is a debate over whether this ivory tower , nose-in-the-air approach to entertainment is a distraction or an objective means of ' rating ' someone 's writing .
The weight of a body means at rotation does not increase .
However the children were less keen on the toilets and lack of a playground meant that they did n't interact with other children .
Various offers / deals such as a meal and a drink means not much money has to be spent to go out for lunch or dinner .
" Newbie " is a term meaning " new to ...
Obviously , reviewing a film means the critic is going to use a healthy dose of hyperbole , but good lord Sir , the above sentence just smells of deep seat anger and rage .
A higher proportion of collagen in a bone means greater toughness .
The main way in which UIMA achieves interoperability is by virtue of a standard means of communication between resources .
4.9 A good measure of the non-linearity of the D function in this case could be a root mean square difference ( denoted as an rms difference ) calculated between the linear function fitted to the initial and final point of the decay , and the decay data .
In this case , adding a language means adding translation between that language and the intermediate representation , not adding translation between the new language and all of the other languages .
Otherwise she would n't come , especially with the game on , but saving even a penny means a lot to her .
Today we must seize every opportunity to educate , organize , and act locally to establish vehicles to mobilize the growing sentiment for change ; we must do so with the determination to provide an alternative means for winning change when the Democrats either fail to deliver or deliver inadequate solutions to the various crises we will confront .
Fitting a sidecar to a bike means more maintenance .
The majority of British bikes then had small brakes which only just coped with stopping solo , so fitting a chair means you might find stopping very hard indeed .
All went well until a slump meant that demand for these type of products dried up , but being resourceful he set up another business manufacturing screws .
Such a strategy means that they must use Beau Geste tactics .
It was amazing when we arrived because there were about 30 people in a venue meant for 2,500 21 .
Men are a soooo mean sometimes !!!
It is a day meant primarily for doing nothing and secondly dreading the beginning of another vacuous week .
A writer for the Independent stated that Bohemians suffered , because being a Slav meant that they lacked attractiveness and elegance .
It was all Arsenal from then on , and Thomas Vermaelen made it 20 six minutes from half time , when a pass meant for Gervinho fell to him instead , and he made no mistake with a sidefooted finish .
Joining a group means you see information posted by members of that group .
To put all my pre-judgements up front , I believe in co-creating a sustainable world , and celebrating bio and human diversity , and that an alternate means of ' interdependence ' 2 outside of the monopoly money system , to be a vital mechanism to affect such change .
It just looks like a pointless whinge about amateur radio , however the drongos being discussed having a licence means diddly squat , a plank is a plank is a plank .
al - ' Owhali , in committing the offense described in the 13 capital count you are considering , knowingly created a grave 14 risk of death to one or more persons in addition to the 15 deceased victim or victims identified in the particular count 16 " Knowingly " creating such a risk means that 17 Mr .
The ability to throw or hit a ball means you will judged as worthy of being on the team or not .
There is also an invisible sorcerer who has trapped the world in his spell , attached the skirt of evening to the skirt of time without a seam-which means twilight will never be snuffed out , darkness will never descend .
Faithfulness as a parent means that Christian parents take the time and effort to work on their marriages .
Faithfulness as a parent means that we take the time and effort to teach our children about Jesus and model for them what it looks like to be a Christian .
To dream that you are a skeleton means that you are worrying too much over things that are trivial .
To dream of a stopwatch means there is a good opportunity presenting itself to you , and you will have to act quickly to take advantage of it .
Splitting a precinct means creating a new precinct which means a new polling place .
Joseph and Mary were not instructed to call the child Christ , for that is a title meaning Anointed .
Validating a certificate means traversing a chain of certification authorities until a known authority is met. In the case of two communicating parties this means that when one party receives the certificate of the other party , it can either recognise the certificate and trust the other party , or check who has signed the certificate and whether he can trust that CA .
Even with work , 8 or 9 kr a day meant slow starvation .
So choosing a bell-curve means you assume a drop-off at a certain point .
Here , an attractor means one of the states of the system where the system settles after starting from a given initial condition .
Brennan must also deal with the " death " of Booth , who took a bullet meant for her .
Every significant change in an idea means a new term .
A tie means no one becomes king .
The availability of nonmilitary INFOSYS often offer the command an alternative means to satisfy its informational C 2 needs , but only after a careful assessment of security risks .
Having a company means others - perhaps the employees - can be given shares and so have an interest in the business .
My kids are pretty good about putting on their life jackets around water -- even Little Guy knows that no flotation at the beach or on a boat means not going near the water .
A referral means that someone has vouched for you , already assessed your worth , which is probably the best way to break away from the mass and be noticed in a customer 's mind .
My point was that sometimes a boycott means hardship for the boycotters .
More importantly , astronomers have known since the late 18th century that the speed of the Earth 's rotation is not constant-so calculating seconds , minutes , and hours strictly as fractions of a day means that each of those units could have a slightly different value every day .
For an identity to be an effect means that it is neither totally determined nor fully artificial and arbitrary ...
Note that deep for a jerkbait means six to eight feet .
Believing that conflict in a relationship means the relationship is in trouble .
Genograms : A pictorial means of gaining information regarding family patterns .
In Anglo-Saxon culture , being a hero meant being brave on the battlefield , being loyal to one 's lord , not harming family members , and seeking fame , as evidenced by Beowulf and " The Wanderer .
As a simple means to avoid such non-terminating resolutions , service providers may define limits on the number of links that may be involved in any single operation invoked by the caller .
We looked at how installing a multi-seat suite into a school meant drastic savings could be made , and just as we began discussing the technicalities such as how implementing such as system would impact on performance , Dave Smith sounded his claxon meaning it was time to switch tables .
Markets in the Asia-Pacific region were lower on reports that China ordered its six largest banks to increase the amount of cash held in reserve , a move meant to make it more difficult to get loans and thus cool off the economy there .
My DD 2 would sleep in the daytime through a lot of noise in her Moses basket although I did try and introduce a time for quiet colouring which mean that being quiet while mummy got baby off for a nap meant a reward of mummy 's undivided attention .
AdRoll is not a site meant for children , and we do not provide privacy measures designed to protect children when using the Internet unsupervised .
Linus admitted to CIO.com that letting other people have a say means you sometimes have to admit you were wrong .
Instead , his objection is to students engaging in political dissent against paid representatives of the Israeli government and the Israeli Defense Forces ; statements like " It is an action meant to deny others their right to free speech " seemingly apply only to criticism of Israel , not protests of campus policy .
However , Baki , or better spelled Beki is a title meaning female chieftain or shaman .
Since a surrender means a death , it can only lead to a confrontation ...
Once fully developed , they will provide us an objective means of tracking our progress towards successfully delivering the Strategy .
A square means that the collection is not being sync 'd , and a little line with the two barbed ends means that it is being sync 'd .
The point a piece means that Shipley escape the dreaded bottom place wooden spoon as they leapfrog Lower Beeding on goal difference .
As far as I can recall , it 's the only time in the history of The Apprentice when losing a task means that you will certainly be fired .
I feel a bit mean taking the pee out of her for being uninspired with her spiel though - it must be so hard to be natural in that kind of situation , which is why I thought Howard did so well .
how do i work out what the 5 a part means , could n't find it on the fault lists .
To control a port means to have guardians there .
Mastery of a term means you are in control of discussions and communications around that topic .
NicEdit is extremely lightweight and can be easily integrated in any site with minimal impact while providing visitors an effective means to express themselves in rich text .
Ultimately , we concluded that being a goddess means opening your life to greater intimacy , self-acceptance , love , and sex-gifts bestowed upon us by Holstein and McCarter .
As was the case later in America , canals became a principle means of transportation for the iron and coal prior to the development of the railroads .
" I ca n't say I was hoping for a rainout because of what a win means out here , but I wanted to play .
The importance of control over re-exports , international cooperation in eradicating close links between precious minerals and the illicit trade in SALW , and the eradication of root causes including widespread poverty and internal conflict as a primary means to addressing the eradication of illicit SALW in regional , national and international circles was noted .
Lord Phillips held that it is necessary to consider what an article means , in order to consider what must be verified so as to satisfy the test for responsible journalism .
If to be a feminist means to believe in these things , then just about everyone is a feminist .
Becoming a Druid means that you have reached the highest rank on the path and may now be regarded as vastly learned in the ways of the land , community and the Other World .
The increase of population from couple thousand to several million in less than a century means that almost everyone came here from somewhere else .
Sometimes I think a song means one thing and then it develops over the years ; sometimes it stays the same .
And i 'm not stating that you being a hypocrite means you have no say , but I 'd just think you 'd ought to understand what it means to play and think on both sides .
" Later opening hours for a nightclub means the later availability of alcohol , with the potential for an increase in crime and disorder due to this consumption .
I 'm sometimes a lot meaner than I 'm willing to admit , and I had to take a step back to realize that .
" The vulnerable position of gypsies as a minority means that some special consideration should be given to their needs and their different lifestyle both in the relevant regulatory framework and in reaching decisions in particular cases .
No offence but i find it o bit odd that you are very young and you were out on such a huge horse meant for burghly ect i personally would only put very experienced riders on a horse meant to do so much .
In 2001 the Boise City Council passed an ordinance banning total nudity in public unless it had " serious artistic merit " - an exemption meant to apply to plays , dance performances and art classes .
100 Great Poems of the Twentieth Century In Greek , an anthology meant a bouquet .
For example , the idea of stone in my mind ( objective reality ) must be caused by a being ( formal reality ) at least as great as the reality represented in that idea of a stoneóthis means that the idea of the stone must either be caused by a stone or a greater being ( such as an angel or God ) .
These were also often used , though not necessarily FDA-approved for an alternative means of treating ADHD children who developed tics , could not otherwise tolerate stimulants , who may have some co-existing problems such as insomnia , bedwetting , depression , or anxiety , or whose parents feared Ritalin might turn their children into the dreaded " green zombie " .
In the context of my previous post where we are looking at how ordinary people can be educated about social media and it can be made a mainstream means of communication it is the role models who will obviously be blazing the trail .
I had an idea that things were going to change a while ago so I sowed the seeds by first changing my username on Twitter - it made sense in other ways too ; Twitter is a personal service with direct interaction between people so using my actual name instead of a brand means people know exactly who they are talking to .
Sammy continues to prove why he has a career before and after Van Halen , Michael Anthony is playing a way meaner bass than anything he ever did with VH .
Does the language of a movie mean more to the PGA than the nationality of the producers , or the movie 's primary audience ?
[ 2 ] According to the Convention on the Rights of the Child of the UN , " a child means every human being below the age of eighteen years unless under the law applicable to the child , majority is attained earlier .
As a result , axillary sampling ( removal of 4 nodes ) has been proposed as an alternative means of assessing nodal status .
Needle aspiration and oral antibiotics has been suggested as an alternative means of treatment .
For Father Marco , being a priest means being able to serve the privileged ones of the Gospel , society 's marginalised .
Love that Doyle says getting a half instead of a pint means they can have two bites at the cherry ( getting a second half means another look at the girl ) .
They lead to the main timeline of tweets from people you follow , the timeline of interactions other people have taken on your tweets , a stream meant to surface tweets you have n't seen , and your own Twitter tweet history , respectively .
I often explain to my mother that to be a writer means to suffer mercilessly and experiment with prescription medication .
The drive to make a profit means these breeders will take short cuts and often fail to provide quality care , socialisation and enough room and time for exercise .
Did the fact that certain matters , which were cited in the ET claim , were not raised in a grievance mean that the claims could not be heard ?
Of course , being early with an advert means less dilution and a prime ( nearer the top ) page position !
Family and friends are sometimes understandably terrified of a confession of suicidal thoughts and I think a ' family protection ' mechanism kicks in , whereas talking with a professional means that the suiicidal thoughts are taken seriously , but still explored on a more rational level .
We planned to show a new short film , 44 Tonne Articulated Trucks and Towns Do n't Mix , by filmmaker Robin Webb , on the dangers posed to cyclists by heavy lorries , but unfortunately lack of a projector meant that this will have to be delayed until a forthcoming monthly meeting .
But people , like youself , seem to think that just because they have a seat means that there will be widespread changes in law regarding copyright and piracy .
I would not agree with the change , but realize that living under a democracy means that changes I do not agree with sometimes occur .
Before I grade my opponents ( and they grade me ) I tell them that I think a 10 should be rare and explain what a grade means to me , I do n't tell them what I am giving them because that can lead to grade-trading .
To be done good to , to be planned for , to be cast into a mold , to be the victim of a program means the fixing of well defined patterns of thought and conduct according to a predetermined standard ...
A tract of tropical forest in the Congo Basin mapped with the help of local pygmies has become the largest in the world certified under a system meant to ensure responsible logging , partners in the project said on Tuesday .
Second , as the examples in this paper show , information warfare is a potential means to achieve typical Air Force ends : strategic attack , interdiction , etc. More fundamentally , the Air Force already does information warfare through such systems as the EF -111 and Compass Call .
That is what this business about carrying a cross means .
Their proposal is to digitise a series of the more familiar dabbawalla icons and to incorporate these on to signs , tickets and timetables alongside the station names , thus providing an alternative means of recognition .
There 's so much to do on this one little teether that it kept Logan amused for quite a while meaning I could get things done around the house .
Ownership of such a site means that the owner must give three months notice to the Secretary of State of any intended demolition , removal or repair .
The environment was equally tense in other towns such as Bindura , Masvingo and Gweru where suspected Zanu ( PF ) youths were camped at meeting venues in a move meant to instil fear in members of the public .
Michael Large had worked successfully in his job for a number of years , but a reorganisation meant that his post was no longer available .
This may not be one of the most traditional means of direct outreach , but it does make sense in this 21st century world in which we live-not just as a sort of ' pre-evangelism ' - but as a concrete means of modelling the love and presence of Christ in this fallen world ' .
Little else is known about John Wicking other than the fact that in 1731 he was referred to as a yeoman meaning he was a farmer who was more prosperous than the average husbandsman .
Having a disability means to experience entrenched barriers , which hinder progress within any mainstream structure that might nurture standard leaderships skills .
Pacing a process means being able to slow it down enough so that you can think .
John says that such a claim means they are deceiving themselves and the truth is not in them .
Working as a chef means he is unable to make training on Tuesdays but he has sharpened up his hand speed with extra sessions at Bideford ABC .
Ask yourself at the time what you think a symptom means and if you identify any negative associations with it .
Entering a postcode means the clip will then appear on Google Maps ( for people who have the option to display films on the map ticked ) .
She said : " Taking me out on Valentine 's night and showing the world that we are a couple meant so much .
Has anyone fitted a gearbox meant for a 1.4 to a 1.7 before ?
Obviously , reading a series about a thief-hero means you have to modify some of your principals .
This person is someone who you know is a friend of your target , and the fact that they have n't loaded an image means they may not use Facebook often and rarely keep in contact with your target .
Sitting in the living room reading a book meant to my parents that I was wasting my time , and instead should be mowing the lawn or scrubbing floors or washing the car .
A layer means the level of consciousness , the depth of rational understanding .
Applying an interest rate to an investment means that the value grows over time even if it is fixed .
You can never truly tell what a dream means .
The ' polarity ' is simply a software means of adding hardware inverters into the HPWM output lines .
To be a champion means being better than all the rest at that given time , weather it 's through a full season of racing or 12 rounds of boxing , the champion is the better sportsman .
Let us not forget that the first law that the new government in Kiev tried to pass was one banning Russian as an official language , a measure meant to appease the Ukrainian nationalists but that sent a clear message to the mass of the population in Eastern Ukraine , where the bulk of the industrial working class of the country is concentrated .
Foods to EatThose who experience chronic renal failure are likely on dialysis , an artificial means to filter wastes from the body 2013 new oakley sunglasses " It looked as though she walked up .
Our annual rainfall is around 500 mm annually and living on a slope means the level of infiltration is not that high .
As used in this rule , a sawmill means a mill that is exclusively engaged in the manufacture and distribution of lumber made from logs by use of saws to cut the logs into various size boards .
A warning means that high winds are imminent .
A warning means that flooding is highly likely .
A warning means that flooding is highly likely or is already occurring .
A warning means that heavy snow is imminent .
An advisory means hazardous winter weather is already occurring .
A warning means that heavy snow is highly likely late tonight and Monday .
A warning means that heavy snow is highly likely .
For example , you must do this when the nature of a transaction means that there 's a higher risk of money laundering .
Then he explains what comes next : ' The city thought a farm meant a big red barn , with pigs and chickens .
Season 5 Episode 14 Prints Charming Arthur gets a new mobile phone , while a mix-up means Doug and Carrie are given another couple 's photographs .
that you perceive this as a plot means you have gone over the edge .
Cinco de Mayo is a holiday meant to commemorate Mexico 's victory in a battle against the French , known as the Battle of Puebla .
Planning for a disaster means knowing what to do in each possible situation .
In 1988 , Iacocca co-authored ( with Sonny Kleinfeld ) Talking Straight , [ 14 ] a book meant as a counterbalance to Akio Morita 's Made in Japan , a non-fiction book praising Japan 's post-war hard-working culture .
Releasing the magic smoke into a system meant to spread air through buildings is probably an especially bad idea ...
it burns fast , " Mayor Robert W. Singer said after dipping into the fire a scroll meant to represent that last bond owed to pay off the minor league ball field and promised commercial anchor of Lakewood .
This demo shows what each part of a ruleset means .
To quote Ted Nelson quoting Roger Gregory , " An option means the programmer did n't have a clear idea of what the module was supposed to do .
The Bunnymen , though , were always built for middle age - they were never boy band young , being an artist means age is an irrelevance and their new single ... is proof that they have never dried up .
Is a connection meant or implied ?
"  However , members of the Ioway Nation , who today inhabit Kansas , Nebraska and Oklahoma , will tell you that Ioway is the French spelling of Ayuhwa , a name meaning " sleepy ones "  given to the tribe in jest by the Dakota Sioux .
Such a track means that the bullet would have passed through Richthofen 's heart .
In fact , at least 240 days of sunshine a year means your visit will be as bright as the sparkling , ever-visible harbour .
> Does any one know of a period means to ' make ' amber ?
| Does any one know of a period means to ' make ' amber ?
Because MW is directly related to the energy released by an earthquake , it is a uniform means of measuring earthquake magnitude and has become the standard measure of earthquake magnitude in modern seismology .
It would be like a volcano erupting with an explosion meant to destroy Iraq , Lebanon , Palestine .
Further , Gassendi offers his molecular model as a material means of storing ontogenetic information received from the souls of parent organisms ( O II 170 b -171 a , 280 b ) .
Feminists have pointed out , in particular , that gender-specific norms on emotional experience and expression have been a standard means of maintaining inequality among the sexes in many cultures ( de Beauvoir 1952 ) .
Running for at least a week means you can average out the difference between the days , and running for two weeks means you can average out between two weeks .
" But this fell out to be nothing but a device of the Governor forced upon the Scrivano , to delay time , till they might provide themselves of sufficient strength to entrap us : for which this fellow , by his smooth speech was thought a fit means .
Honoring a language means that its syntactic and lexical rules are followed .
We memorize shortcuts for the results we verified with limits ( d / dx x ^ 3 = 3 x ^ 2 ) , just like we memorize shortcuts for the rules we verified with multiplication ( adding a zero means times 10 ) .
The Internet Mail Access Protocol ( IMAP ) & Post Office Protocol ( POP ) provide users with an alternative means to process and retrieve their email .
By corollary , a standard means of attacking another man is to attack or steal ( or rape or in some way damage ) the other man 's woman .
The issue came up again with respect to the INF Treaty , when Democratic leaders asked for a letter of assurance from Secretary of State Shultz stating that a treaty means what the Administration says it means when it asks for ratification .
The very nature of an airplane means you 're going to be exposed to different types of fliers .
We speculated that an iPad was an ideal means to convey this information to patients and have them report their progress and problems to providers .
Without being overly concerned about semantics or classification ( if that 's actually possible on a site like Boxes and Arrows ) , it is important to establish an objective means of differentiating between a web application and a traditional website .
Learn what a word means before you do it and if you do it live by it .
It was a vote meant to demonstrate the genuine outrage felt by many lawmakers , and not just Republicans , at the personal attack the ad represented on a widely respected military leader during war time .
His lack of a majority meant Mr Callaghan was unable to reverse the decline which had dogged the Labour government since it came to power in 1974 .
Seven years later , they adopted an outline meant to guide their work to strengthen their partnership .
When she got older , I just knew she 'd shrug me off , roll her eyes and say " Mom " in a way meant to tell me my worst fears had come true .
Below is the dialogue from the scene when Jewel admits to Randy that his taking her home was part of a scam meant to set him up to be robbed .
Morning Rituals : Being a diabetic means a healthy lifestyle and early morning gym session .
Them making it wide enough for a car meant this was inevitable but at least there did n't seem to be any night fishermen or dog walkers on there at the time !
If what a company means by a customer loyalty program means cheesy , me-too deals , points programs , or discounts , then they might as well bin it .
Only being in the clinic 3 days a week meant that there was n't enough time to complete the compulsory aspects of the role , so taking on anything extra would have been completely out of the question .
( A ) " Access " as a noun means an instance of copying , viewing , or otherwise perceiving whereas " access " as a verb means to copy , view , or otherwise perceive .
Lindsay Montgomery : If someone has an alternative means of recovery , we will not normally fund them .
How would the matter be determined if the four members of the legal profession said , " Ah , but such and such a case means X , Y and Z " ?
A child means anyone under the age of 16 ( or a disabled young person under the age of 18 ) .
The short life-span of a fox means that females will breed only two or three times on average , while males usually only mate once .
You record in full screen and it plays it back smaller than the size of a stamp meaning you ca n't see anything .
d ) assuming your provider 's badgering pays off , any temp work would have to last for more than 6 months to generate an outcome payment ( and most temp positions wo n't last this long ) and will need to last for a further 18 months to generate maximum payment for the provider ( working for a company for more than a year means that you are no longer a temp if memory serves ? ) .
She says , " For me , being a cooperadora means being a leader in my community .
He 's feeding the PWM from an Arduino into the voltage controlled oscillator on a board meant for high-altitude balloon telemetry .
Of course pruning an herb means that you are actually harvesting the great tasting leaves and stems .
With the passage of § 1396 a(k) , MQTs were no longer a permissible means to shelter assets for purposes of Medicaid eligibility .
A kiss means so much and is a daily reminder that you love and care someone despite everything else .
Twenty years ago working with a model meant using an expensive mainframe computer , learning a complex programming language , and struggling to compile data by hand ; the entire process was clearly marked " experts only .
The former SLSO suggested an alternative means of dealing with third party complaints , which she felt had been successful in her office .
" Having a coach means that a business owner has a safe , confidential place to privately talk about challenges with someone who is trained to listen and ask effective questions to help them refocus and keep them on track , " adds Fung .
According to my Oxford dictionary the word " clem " is a Northern word , it 's a verb meaning to starve .
It was a vocabulary meant for snobs ( although that word came later , in the nineteenth century .
Many people think that going on a diet means they wo n't be able to eat anymore of their favorite foods , but that really is n't true .
But as I hope is indicative from this post , what a text means cannot be separated from the format in which it appears .
I 'm not quite sure I agree with " what a text means cannot be separated from the format in which it appears " .
I could certainly agree with " what a text means cannot always be separated from the format in which it appears " !
I could also agree with " for scholars of the text , what a text means cannot be separated from the format in which it appears " .
There can be a fear that such an analysis means a criticism of the designer , a proposal that the designer is harboring hidden intentions .
, believes these links are an ideal means of extending an artist 's appeal .
We pass on the Western rooms , and opt for a room meant for Bulgarians .
So I thought an X meant " keep data " .
I think it is a great idea , and you are so true about cars being little boxes , and to go on a train means you can meet loads of people .
Providing a choice means leveraging the power of each platform as well as meeting the preferences of testers and developers in each camp .
- Conferencing and video-conferencing are being embraced as an alternative means of working and the increased availability of high-speed broadband is enabling more home working .
After all , a disaster means something horrible has happened on a very large scale .
displaying the representation by a display means .
With respect to dollar amounts of " discretionary budget authority , " a cancellation means " to rescind .
With respect to " new direct spending " items or " limited tax benefit[s] , " a cancellation means that the relevant legal provision , legal obligation , or budget authority is " prevent[ed] ... from having legal force or effect .
Doctors think that the brain has a system meant to monitor where the body parts are , but which needs visual confirmation to check that its sense of them is correct .
The small but necessary step of putting up solar panels one building at a time means fewer fossil fuels will be burned .
I suppose my ambivalence towards policitcal weighting as an approach means I can see how you could construct an argument for both methods giving representative outcomes .
The reality of being a dentist meant treating patients .
To invoke a delegate means to take Target object and call its method described in Method .
An object such as a preceding vehicle is imaged by an image-sensing means at two different points to generate first and second image signals representative of the object .
In order to achieve the above object , according to the present invention , an object such as a preceding vehicle is imaged by an image-sensing means at two different points to generate first and second image signals representative of the object .
How It Works : Salting a hash means adding a random string of characters-called a " salt " - to the beginning or end of your password before hashing it .
Although I unequivocally share the goal of curbing selective disclosure , I am concerned that a proposal meant to get more information to investors could actually give them less .
The image search of Bing - a word meaning " cold [ mp 3 ] " ( as in fridge [ mp 3 ] ) as well as " sick " in Chinese , among other meanings depending on the tones * * - offers one noteworthy difference in comparison to Google Image Search .
The House approved legislation to make it easier for workers to win lawsuits in pay disputes with employers , a move meant to override a Supreme Court decision which was seen as raising the bar on workers in such suits .
In this case , a line means a single progeny row consisting of about 200 plants .
The Chums , whose existence is , to an extent , fictional even within the work of fiction , are a nexus meant to control boundaries between points in time e.g. the future and the present , or its past ) .
If I were a normal person , I 'd just speculate , and maybe discuss the possibilities with friends , but being a writer means I can back up and take some of those other paths .
The only way a democratic system like ours can work is if the majority party acknowledges that winning an election means winning the right to set the agenda and put the first proposal on the table , though not the right to get everything it wants .
The mere existence of a parliament means the absence of the people , but true democracy exists only through the participation of the people , not through the activity of their representatives .
A translator has to understand what a law means before s / he can accurately translate the legal points raised by the involved parties and the judge .
NEWSFLASH : Scientists prove that a word means what the dictionary says it means .
These cultural entities were important not only in producing a communist culture , but also as a vitality means of developing Jewish identity .
I knew the verb craindre meant to fear , but I had no idea there was a slang meaning too .
" Secondly , Jefferson 's " A Manual of Parliamentary Practice , " was a guild meant for the members of Congress , and no one else .
A half means a half-pint .
His wife 's earnings of a little over £ 10,000 a year means the household income is too high , under the new rules , to continue to get the benefit .
Hiring for less than a year meant the unemployed could not claim on the Poor Rates .
It was considered that the fact that you had received a degree meant that you had the ability to structure a training course of study to your decided on goal , and maintain to it .
It was regarded as that the simple fact that you had obtained a degree meant that you experienced the capacity to framework a system of study to your selected objective , and preserve to it .
In most cases , a dissertation means a research paper .
Burgin ( 1986 ) , discussing the film viewer 's experience ( see Berman , in press ) , relates Scottie 's urges to the Oedipal rescue fantasy toward ' fallen women ' analyzed by Freud : ' A man recuing a woman from water in a dream means that he makes her ... his own mother ' ( Freud , 1910 , p 174 ) .
Dr Mark Vaudin , Deputy Chief Executive of the AHT , was also planning to run as part of the team , but an injury meant he had to withdraw at the last minute under medical advice .
Now a group of nuclear experts has told Congress that a loophole in a bill meant to limit the use of bomb-grade uranium in medical isotopes could undo years of work to curb the risk of such material being diverted to such a bomb .
Any SHTF senario of over a month means death to most people in the cities if the cities cannot be resupplied .
IM NOt some dumbed down person , it was a thread meant to give a contribution and got insulted .
but .. maybe wait for someone more experienced in case there is an alternative means of access .
:)) Xxx Autism is on a spectrum meaning that at one end you have a person who is uncommunicative and finds it difficult to socialise and learn but on the other end you have highly intelligent , communicative individuals and there are great variations inbetween .
Autism is on a spectrum meaning that at one end you have a person who is uncommunicative and finds it difficult to socialise and learn but on the other end you have highly intelligent , communicative individuals and there are great variations inbetween .
* NOTE : An asterisk ( * ) after a term means that this definition , in whole or in part , is used with permission from Walter Feldesman , ESQ .
Being a leader means that people can rely on you to get thejob done .
To be a leader means to serve as a role model every hour of every day .
And when the stakes are high , no one is willing to take a risk because , well , a risk means there is a chance you can fail .
Xiaoyu 's post is a response to this prompt : " What does an A in a course mean to you ?
Equipped with a fail-proof means for camouflage , the Flaming Buffalo Toadstool is indeed practically invisible .
For school aged children , having a nanny means they get to come back to their own home at the end of the school day .
From a Yamaha to a Yamaha means being on familiar ground , so that 's always a good start .
Winding down a company means you are taking the steps to close it down .
The trouble of having a large cast in a cartoon meant that most of them were fairly one-dimensional .
Apparently the fact I had a notebook meant that I should .
If I 'm dumb enough to put food into a bin meant for paper and card then I 've no problem with them refusing to empty the bin .
Instead of strapping on the coach seats and driven here and there , taking a bicycle means you can discover it in comfortable pace and see the every detail of Chinese splendid culture , its people and scenery .
A break means flush of liquidity flowing into risk assets .
My father always told us , " To be a Palestinian means you must speak truth to power and you must never give up .
In the context of iText , scaling down an image means increasing the resolution ; we 're rendering an equal amount of pixels on a smaller surface .
Gibson and company chose to translate the Greek word " apocalypto " as " new beginning , " which has raised linguistic hackles , since the word is a verb meaning " uncover " or " reveal .
Perhaps that metaphor does n't suit you , but my point is this : Other than choosing the fields one works in , developing a career means building worthwhile , enduring relationships - whether they sprout from a short term contract or a part time gig , or evolve from a long term position .
Review after a description means that a fuller description and personal view of the book is given in a review that appeared in Arts Professional magazine .
Needless to say , by now , everyone realizes that the changing of a name means there are some problems .
Gorille attempts to provide a standard means of addressing complex issues between XML and Unicode .
It is generally assumed that a large number of transactions taking place in a market means that transaction liquidity will be high and the seller is more likely to receive the price most recently bid to other sellers when his or her posted offer to sell is matched with a buyer .
Salad ; Salade ( French ) ; Ensalada ( Spanish ) This term first appeared in the Fifteenth Century as the Italian " zelada , " a term meaning " salty , " which was first applied to a dish that often appeared on festive tables in Milan .
Finding an error means it can be allowed for. It 's knowing nothing , or denying everything that are the dangerous positions to assume .
To add a notion to a frame means that it is treated as a manipulable : whatever is in the box is outside the reach of manipulation , outside control , outside or inside framing , hence not a pedagogical issue .
That 's what Roger 's rebelling against , too , though the fact that he 's a man means he has more latitude and can better resist being shamed and shut out .
Previously the rules on claims have been very general , making it difficult for consumers to know what a term means and difficult for food companies ( particularly smaller ones ) to be sure they are not misleading the public .
you can only put 1 that you mangaed it pic in a post meaning you gotta wait for someone else to post Well ... i did that this morning , and piathebully was helping me to do this ... it 's not that i have posted the same pic again n again LOL ..
It 's an M 5 , a car meant for petrol heads , not economisers .
Being a superuser means that you are not subject to access controls .
29th- Perkins with a fingertip save on on a cross meant to Saborio .
To make that big of a commitment means giving up a lot of things we do now , so the child better be mine .
Ginny had guessed from Sandra 's short instruction to her that this was an orphanage meant to serve as a home to the unfortunate young witches and wizards , but she was unaware that the misfortune of the children she was watching play was not merely in losing their parents .
However , registering a mark means that the registrant is presumed to be the owner of the mark for the goods and services specified in the application .
Well aware of the demanding and competitive nature of a career in the media , Leah said : " Part of being behind a camera means being patient , waiting hours for the right shot , but it is well worth it .
Reasonably close breeding also is pretty natural in the rabbit - the social structure of a warren means that father / daughter matings wo n't be at all rare .
He also noted that we will need to define limits to systems in order to create an objective means of identification .
It 's exasperating how people assume that having a car means I 'm able bodied again and can drive as far as I 'd like .
The fact that there may be no remedy for someone who incurs costs thinking that he has a deal means that you should be certain you have some way of recovering your cost before you incur it .
But anybody who plays the role of subservient second-fiddle to Schumacher deserves to stand on that top of the podium , and it was good to see a win mean so much to somebody .
More likely a summo means " from the head of the table .
Only problem was that our room did n't have the instruction sheet on how to set the air-conditioning ( with a picture of a house meaning it is actually off except for fan ! ) , ...
: Well , a cross-section of an apple means a cut right thru an apple .
To WAP-enable a website means converting all the code which it is made of , which for sites bigger than just a few pages is a big task !
We are indoctrinated by the media that a swastika means hatred on Hitler only .
Maybe some colored people do have mean traits , but there are brother whites in this county a heap meaner than any nigger I ever saw .
Formal scenes are necessary because the use of a teaser means you 're actually altering the time structure of the play with what is technically a flash-forward : After the teaser is over , the play drops back in time to a period prior to the teaser .
The people of American Airlines have long understood that serving a community means more than just flying there - it means contributing to a range of nonprofit organizations and community events , and encouraging and facilitating employee volunteerism and donations .
If you are not sure whether your recipient knows what an acronym means , it is better not to use it .
Yes , I mean being an MP means your an Upper Middle Class professional like a teacher , doctor , senior civil servant etc. Most teachers earn around £ 36 K , but doctors and senior civil servants are in the £ 60 -200 k bracket .
Janardana das : To make comments like those mentioned in an acknowledgement section of a book meant to glorify Srila Prabhupada is simply in bad taste .
Felix will be fine , if him throwing 5 -10 more pitches a start means us winning more , sign me up .
In this model , exposure might have temporary burial ( within or outside the settlement ) as an alternative means of defleshing the corpse .
But reporters in the capital have described seeing around 200 detainees held at a sports club , where the lack of a roof meant prisoners were forced to gather by a high wall to seek shade .
A fail means that , although you keep QTS , you are removed from the register of teachers allowed to work in state schools .
Two days after the bomb 's discovery , however , FSB chief Nikolai Patrushev announced his agency had staged the incident , planting a dummy bomb in an exercise meant to test public vigilance .
Basically , a sign means what it means on the basis of ' not being ' any of the other signs .
And making a bomb without a shield means almost certain death from the concentrated radiation levels of a radioactive rod or " clump .
Entering TRUE or omitting a value means that Excel will search for approximate matches .
What if Fadil Khan was in league with his enemies , part of a trap meant to trick him into moving openly against King Shakara and thus affording the king a pretext for ordering the sorcerer executed for treason ?
It 's a posture meant to shut down the system , close off the senses , darken the mind .
' I 'd just like to point out that as a whole , goth is a subculture meaning the majority ARE NOT goths .
An alternative means of obtaining compensation may however be available through one of the government established Ombudsman schemes .
The library " will let curious visitors check out living people for a 45 - minute chat in a project meant to tear down prejudices about different religions , nationalities , or professions " .
This is a household lamp , not a flashlight meant to be bashed , thrashed , trashed , and abused .
The Marlins had just been swept by the Phillies when Olney said they were done , so beating MLB 's second-best team ( according to record ) with a shutout meant a lot to Ozzie .
Being a governor means taking the long-term perspective and involvement in both decision-making and scrutiny in the delivery of children 's education and although , at the beginning , it takes time to get up to speed , experience of complex people processes , which legal work inevitably brings , is a good starting point for this role ( not dissimilar to non-executive directorship ) .
Unlike on a trail where a skid can be used for control , on the road a skid means you are on your way out of control .
But this cannot be appropriate in a measure meant to expose wrongdoing .
I wonder if 17 k of a crowd means a loss on the day given the policing costs and DUFC 's entitlement to half the gate receipts ?
A crisis means shifting to a different level of discourse ; crises are to a large extent produced semantically in public discourse creating a theatre of cultural interests where solutions can be performed .
Crisis has a temporal dimension : to state a crisis means to start a process of limited time in which to bring the crisis to an end .
If you ca n't figure out what a task means or if you 're not sure how to do it , ask on the talk page .
Putting Chua on a pedestal means accepting her equivalence of " Chinese parenting " - whatever that is - with anecdotes like telling her daughter if she does n't master a piano piece that she would take her " stuffed animals and burn them .
In Proverbs 20:22 20:22 the promised result of eagerly expecting God 's help is expressed with a word meaning " help , " " deliver , " or " save .
He considered grantmaking an investment meant to bring about lasting , long-term results .
, relationresultTherethe locker room Dehghan stamp with rage , he also clearly Pro before conceding a goal means nothing , get the three points now be placed in jeopardy , because a player the result of his carelessness .
That 's the only reason to take him really , Sword of Unholy Power is nice , but you do n't really want Hero Manfredd in combat ; being a vampire means he has good stats but he is very squishy .
top dogs for a start means finishing above you every year .
My wife and I have a glass of juice once a day meaning less than 0.5 litres per day .
Perhaps a mixup means that a premium rate number has been forwarded to her number .
In Ethiopia , 12 fill a plane meant for 100 and , though there are two stops before we reach our destination , no one new gets on board .
Lack of the minimal democracy provided by a market meant that the standard of consumer goods was terrible .
• uriblank • uriblank Plus the amount of discipline and attention involved in learning how to write Chinese characters compared with Westerners learning 26 letters of an alphabet means that Oriental kids are wired for concentration in a different way from the outset --- long before they gain computers , games and social networks into their repertoire .
Re-purposing or re-packaging an article means giving it another form and format based on the exiting content and research .
But if your code is held in SAS catalogs , e.g. SCL and source entries , then you need to find an alternative means of searching .
The Search screen gives you a poweful means of finding bookings using multiple search criteria .
Online business is actually removing as well as an growing quantity of baby seniors have found it an ideal means to fix their retirement needs .
In contrast , the Mormons not only have a clear idea of what being a heir means , but have additional scripture concerning this key Biblical figure .
Parallel processing in a nutshell means performing program steps simultaneously instead of one after another ( which is serial processing ) .
It would , however , have been much , much better had the previous Government , under which the revealed cost of holding the games trebled in a few months , had found an alternative means of funding them , perhaps setting up a special lottery for the purpose .
Northern added that a restructuring meant its factories were well placed to cope with competitive conditions in the key autumn and winter period .
The main criticisms of bullpups are that they tend not to feel as well-balanced in the hands as conventional rifles ( although to some extent that is a matter of what you are used to ) , and they are not suited to left-handed shooting as the spent cases are normally ejected to the side , which in a bullpup means into the left-handed firer 's face .
To be a pupil means to be given heaps of senseless tasks daily , to be shouted at , to have your opinion totally ignored .
Compensation of a module means that it is not possible for you to achieve an overall merit or distinction at the certificate , or at subsequent diploma or masters levels .
It is claimed that the phonetic " waw-kay " is a phrase ( or word ) in either the Bantu or Wolof dialects ( or both ) , " kay " being a word meaning " yes , " and " waw " an emphatic ; " waw-kay " is an emphatic " yes .
DARK DAYS : Why risk even one drink when failing a test means you lose your licence for at least a year ?
The widgetry is imbued with more features to leverage MapReduce 2.0 , when it gets here , a move meant to push the start-up way ahead of its Hadoop rivals .
Rantonimo , it 's a little funny that you looked everywhere for the meaning of " douchehound " except in this blog , the readers of which were being enjoined in this post to take part in a community meant exclusively for them .
However , her background as a journalist means that she 's left behind boxes upon boxes of written material .
) Q. How do you put so much meaning into a book meant for young adults ?
The huge yardage in a skein means you can make many different kinds of projects with just one skein , and not just small projects , either .
There is nothing in this world that will really guarantee good workmanship , whether it 's the Guild of flat roofers , master bakers or whatever , being a professional means only one thing-you 're paid to do it .
Equitable estimate that , with these changes , cover for the required minimum margin would have fallen from 2.5 to 2.0 and add : ' Whether or not such a difference means that there was " a material effect on the overall financial position shown in the 1997 returns " is , of course , a matter of judgement ' .
In a former time that was perhaps what being a fan meant .
" A shutdown means that there 's no additional funding that is made available for contracts , " Elizabeth Ferrell , a government contracts expert at McKenna Long & Aldridge , told Politico .
The expense of writing materials and the time needed to copy a manuscript meant that every attempt had to be made to save space .
This was in the days when a drift meant a drift .
Drum loops work brilliantly if you 're remixing into an entirely different style , but using a loop means you will have to work out the tempo difference and match it accordingly ... if you 're not a DJ this can be a quite frustrating process .
What is also known now is that a single complex system can combine radar tracking with a speed-of-light means of destruction - the plasmoid .
I find it really hard to draw at these shows so by pre-ordering a commission means you get a much nicer drawing and lets me spend more time selling my books .
Normal is what could have been , and a parasite means something that could alter behavior .
Arabic music in a movie meant that terrorists were coming .
This category was created in 2006 to provide an at-a-glance means of identifying the relatively rare tequilas that are aged for more than 3 years .
Otherwise you end up with a kernel meant to run on your pc , duh !
" following a name means that no combination has yet been made and no taxonomic equivalence has been indicated in any other genus ; however , these names should not be assumed to be transferrable to Psychotria , but may belong to other genera .
In one scene , the jester ( now promoted to the King 's advisor ) convinces a courier to turn over a letter meant for the Duchess ( played by Olga Baclanova of Freaks ) by leading the courier to her bathroom door and allowing him to peer through a keyhole as the Duchess cavorts in a bathtub .
A biopsy means removing some of the abnormal cells to look at them under a microscope .
But with land-based LNG extraction facilities becoming more costly , FLNG is poised to offer an alternative means by which to unlock stranded resources as the demand for fuel soars .
Parallelizing such an algorithm means trying to run these steps " simultaneously " on multiple CPUs , and hopefully can speed up the whole process of execution .
This is the archetypal Stateside teenage world , where being slender and cool holds power and being a jock means you can sleep with who you like regardless of your lack of brains .
This fitness training argument has been put forth as an additional justification for maintaining the current system , but it is insufficient support for the bayonet as a principal means of killing on the modern battlefield .
Rick Binzel , on behalf of the DPS Committee 2 --- 2 --- 2 --- 2 --- 2 --- 2 --- 2 --- 2 ICARUS SUBSCRIPTIONS ENCOURAGED Icarus is the official journal of the DPS and a principal means by which our members communicate their research and mission results to each other .
Additionally , " Hou Tian " as a term means " Later " , " Acquired after birth " , " Assimilated artificially " .
This is his own uniquely designed test , a test meant for him and no one else .
As for a We , the projection of a We-system is more a specific means of Pynchonesque Heroism than a qualification for all Heroism .
" This is the first time I 've seen anyone come out with a product meant for commercial use and not video games , " he says .
( ( D. ) ) " Compensation earnable " by a member means the average compensation as determined by the Board of Administration upon the basis of the average period of employment of members in the same group or class of employment and at the same rate of pay .
The recent practice of saying that someone refuted an assertion meaning he or she denied it vigorously or repudiated it , has the unintended consequence of suggesting the person using the word in this sense is taking sides .
Getting him for a year means he can really concentrate on what we want from him and along with the signings of Jordan and Nosworthy it gives us real stability at the back .
What does such a student mean to a teacher ?
For seniors , a car means independence , says Lynn Shaw , an assistant professor in Occupational Therapy at Western .
The aerosol produced by the pneumatic Laskin generator has a broad distribution - typically a GSD of 1.5 to 1.7 and a count mean diameter of about 0.35 µm .
The aerosol produced is defined as a mono-dispersed aerosol as it has a GSD of 1.2 to 1.4 and a count mean diameter of nominally 0.2 µm .
The closure of Leuchars as an airbase means Fife is likely to take a £ 60 million hit and could lose up to 2000 jobs if the worst possible news is confirmed .
The point though is Final Impact is a move meant to cut threw and kill someone base on Vegeta 's reaction when Buu gets up from it .
" The fact that they are not prepared to send a witness means that they are either totally incompetent and they do n't have anything to tell us ... or they 're refusing to allow us to fulfill our constitutional responsibility " of congressional oversight , Biden said .
In some cultures a kiss means a friendly " hello .
Before , getting a crown meant two visits to the dentist .
Wheeler offers an essay meant to support his own , less radical non-classical view , " embedded cognition " in contrast to the extended cognition ( or the extended mind hypothesis formulated by Chalmers and Clark 2009 ) .
Being a person means striving towards self-realization ( the Council text speaks of self-discovery ) , which can only be achieved " through a sincere gift of self .
With respect to Requirement B 1 , you believe that your clients cannot make provision for an alternative means of escape and that your proposals for the 60 minutes protected stair up to the fifth floor of the building , together with the alarm system , are the best compensatory measures which can be applied - particularly having regard to the fact that the building is listed Grade II .
A decision meant war-war , which was the very antithesis of all she had at heart .
The Council , in conjunction with the Passenger Transport Authority , intend to provide a balanced efficient and integrated public transport system to offer an alternative means of transport to the private car .
Despite being a casual listener to classical music for a fair while , I 'm getting more interested in building a CD collection , although the fact that I 'm a student means I often ca n't buy much of what I 'd like .
Such a style means he often marks up but there is no dog in him and the challenger is bullish mood ahead of this one , insisting his age wo n't be a factor .
Only when our pursuit of this ' added value ' begins to damage what has been taken for granted and our natural relationships , do we pause to reflect on how much , say , a mountain means to us .
Since it would appear many of these are overseas students , it would appear the ability to pay is more important than academic ability , and that universities are for some a back-door means of escaping immigration control .
Contrary to what has been implied here there is no requirement to have a fire escape but there must be an alternative means of access .
" In this paragraph and paragraphs 350 -352 a child means a person who is under 18 years of age or who , in the absence of documentary evidence establishing age , appears to be under that age .
Protecting your goal to become a homeowner means making sure that you qualify for a home loan when the time comes Revolution devoured by its children 0501 libya .
Designing a website means that you are not only the designer but you 're also the project manager requiring you to constantly keep in mind how the components that form the site fit together and meet the requirements of the business .
But , as they 're always on , the difference between an energy-efficient model and a guzzler means hidden costs could be drastically increasing your electricity bills .
If the fact you have a penis means you ca n't go swimming , use the library , get a job , receive state benefits , or see you kids then any whatever " justification " given is meaningless because there is none .
Just as with the previous problem , the phenomenon is of use to geophysicists , who can use it to measure conductivity by a non-contact means .
How long a user spends on a page means nothing without additional information about what the user was doing , why the user was doing it , and whether the experience was successful and satisfying .
A misdiagnosis means that a patient with Lyme disease or another tick-borne illness is given antibiotics that will not work .
This website is known as a walk-by means of for all the info you wanted about this and did n't know who to ask .
During their time , the world was a different place , and there were fewer outlets where the literate public could get its hands on a book-which meant that the self publishers of the world had a slightly easier time in reaching their target market .
Her " virginity " ( not having childred - however Orpheus mentions the " unspoken nights of warfriendly - philopolemos - Athena " , but nothing more on this ) is an allegory meaning that wisdom is complete in itself and does n't produce some other form concerning mind and wise thinking .
But a rule forbidding the removal of an officer from his post part way through a term means they will have to wait until April to try to remove him from office .
In July an unnamed finance company had " instigated an alternative means of bringing cash into the business " , which failed to materialise .
Two magicians in the past few years have told me that the price and condition of a book means nothing to them as long as they are able to get at least one good trick from it .
Plaintiffs and plaintiff 's attorneys are often motivated to settle because a settlement means they wo n't have to go through a lengthy and potentially risky appeals process .
" So what if they did n't get official permission , a mere technicality , an excuse meant to appease the Holocaust powers who were organizing the rally .
And of course a vehicle means misery for Natsu no matter what the weather .
He also claims his tax plan wo n't reduce the " share of the tax burden " paid by the wealthiest Americans , a canard meant to hide his massive tax cut for the wealthy 8 / 1 / 12 : Romney 's Plan Would Raise Taxes On The Middle Class The Tax Policy Center returns to the Romney tax plan , attempting to find out how he would pay for it .
Being handed a knife means that you are entrusted with one of the key duties of tomato day : tomato inspection .
While national statistics may report that crime is down , our community has experienced a rise meaning more victims .
As monitor resolutions grow bigger things may change a bit , but still you should use a font meant for reading when writing a paragraph and a font meant for visibility when writing a big heading .
In this context , using a proxy means that data backup for the entire NAS device is handled by a single system acting as a backup client .
As before , an adjective deriving from a root meaning the " polis " or " civis " should be translated as " civil " or " societal " or " political " but not " personal status " .
Being a Conservative means never having to explain .
( 1 ) NEW ORLEANS ( 6 -0 ) : A win means the Saints start 7 -0 for the second time in franchise history .
It is also communally damaging : If , for instance , American Jewish college students are convinced that being a Zionist means one can criticize the Gaza pullout but not settlement building , quite a few young people might feel they must choose between identifying with Israel and their liberal political views .
This OCD thing also effects how designers interact within their profession , when micro-managing all spects of a job means that they are unwilling to share the burden because the final output might be tainted - and therefore they dissasiate themselves with that part of the job ...
This adaptive development also serves communication purposes : a quivering tail on a cat means she loves you to shreds ( just pray she does n't mean that literally ) .
# 16 : " graph of CO 2 going sky high only means something " Actually , such a graph means quite a lot , if you understand such measurements .
" [ 121 ] RoadPeace described the practical difficulties of really understanding what a sentence means and of families of victims not getting information about whether an offender had appealed against sentence and what would happen next .
An industry means all firms in the same type of business e.g. the Banking industry refers to all businesses involved in providing financial services .
The extra penny a pound means that participating companies together pay an additional $ 4 million a year for tomatoes .
" Endowing a chair means that the gift is invested , and the income on the investment provides the chair holder with funds for research , student support , and other professional activities such as travel and publication costs .
Kieron Gillen : I ca n't help but wonder - if a game 's based around user-generated content , and the fact you 're on a console means that you ca n't actually let gamers generate their content without half of it being deleted because it infringes some copyright or another ... is n't that just a fundamentally flawed concept ?
He also suggests that whatever the brand idea in the logo , the mere fact that the idea is expressed as a logo means it cannot be alive .
Precept here is SHD 6673 tsav as an injunction meaning a commandment and , hence , a law or precept .
The most well-understood is mutual exclusion -- only one thread can hold a monitor at once , so synchronizing on a monitor means that once one thread enters a synchronized block protected by a monitor , no other thread can enter a block protected by that monitor until the first thread exits the synchronized block .
Watching a puppy means eyes on the puppy at all times - not just having the puppy in the room while you cook or watch TV .
The news apparently will not affect the company 's committment to a Mac version of its RealPlayer client , although the lack of a server means Mac Webmasters will be without a solution for streaming the popular multimedia format .
The biggest rise in NHS spending for a generation means that we can expand the numbers of staff in the NHS and increase rates of pay .
For him to will a thing means that it must be done .
A standard means a guidon or staff to which the people may rally and identify themselves with a specific side .
I just wanted to have a clear file at the 6 year point and not having a default means this entry will be on there for an extra year and whilst I will have a perfect record in every other way , I will still have this record showing I have fallen behind in payments .
Such a feature means you can use the Flyer as if it were a normal notepad - except everything will be stored digitally , not something many other tablets can do !
I did n't , for example , suggest that you being a woman meant that you had ' issues ' .
" Receiving from our Lord the love of a Father , receiving from our Lord the identity of a people and then transforming it into an ethic means we are refusing that gift of love .
In Canada , a password means that the police require a specific warrant to access your phone .
A few bucks a month means I have my blog up and running in 20 minutes and technical support when I need it ...
Take up the White Man 's burden , And teach the Philippines What interest and taxes are And what a mortgage means .
This is the reason why the discovery of instances which confirm a theory mean very little if we have not tried , and failed , to discover refutations .
I have to work hard at communication , and being a manager means I have to do a lot more communication ... so bleh .
Will a defeat mean the end for Andy Robinson ?
We 've found that sometimes it 's about getting people to think differently about what a home means for families around the world .
If being an egomaniac means I believe in what I do and in my art or my music , then in that respect you can call me that I believe in what I do , and I 'll say it .
A simple example would be a diminutive suffix added to the word " cat " to form a word meaning " small cat .
The main difficulty is that to be at a minimum means not only that the surface is the right overall shape , but that the details of the triangulation are also optimal .
In English law , this liability has been chiefly recognised through proprietary estoppel and it is argued that the limits currently placed on that doctrine should be relaxed , so that it can be used as a general means to protect pre-contractual reliance .
Judges 15:15 -17 - ' Jawbone ' as a verb meaning to try to influence by strong persuasion !
Production staff rang Alastair with the urgent query but a misunderstanding meant the set was plunged into confusion .
Remember when an appetizer meant shrimp cocktail , consommé , or other light fare to whet your appetite ?
Skadi must know what giving someone a phone meant , but maybe it only meant that if you did it a certain way .
( A " release " of a chemical means that it is emitted to the air or water , or placed in some type of land disposal .
" People with autism are taught that a smile means someone is happy but this shows it 's not that simple .
Character Questionnaire Active Ingredients Convenient location for consolidating facts ( 986 mg ) Useful reminders ( 310 mg ) Advice ( 127 mg ) Uses This is a questionnaire meant for recording important information in a convenient place to facilitate consistency .
In Thornton Fractional high schools in Calumet City and Lansing , District 215 has a policy meant to make staff more aware of conditions to indicate a student is suffering from problems that could become more serious if not addressed .
These were n't rich people and putting together the money to sponsor a festival meant that the majority of them ended up selling off personal possessions ( like cars and TVs - and other things that we take for granted ) in order to raise the funds .
Of course boiling down a complex literary theoretical movement lends itself to glibness , but in the end , I do n't think it 's unfair to characterize the New Critics as devoted to an ideal of ambiguity that allowed them to say whatever they wanted to about what a poem meant .
If all you want is a simple-to-use means of getting a proper printout then the ADS , LPRINT Mk II and Kempston units offer just what you are looking for , provided that the driving software is available .
On the basis that to have a career means to rush along in a uncontrolled fashion , his career has included studying law at a minor English university , working as joiner , a language teacher , and for the Foreign Office in Latin America , and ( honestly ! ) training in Paediatrics , A & E and General Practice in the People 's Republic of South Yorkshire .
original note re blaa : this word as a rule means to puff , to blow .
What this means is that the rectangle that is shown as you drag the mouse ca n't actually be part of the off-screen canvas , since drawing something into an image means changing the color of some pixels in the image .
Food will be delivered , but other than that it 's a room meant to hold ten , not huge but large enough that no one 's cramped , and has a bench for sitting and sleeping bags .
I may be wrong but does n't a transplant mean that you will have to be on a quite severe drug regime for the rest of your life to stop you rejecting the alien tissue ?
Therefore , learning these 48 ways to acquiring Torah wisdom - one " way " per day with a Day 49 review - was an ideal means of becoming " fit " for Day 50 : the date designated for the lofty Sinai Revelation , when the Jews would receive their defining mission of safeguarding the Torah .
Come celebrate Earth Day with an event meant to be remembered !
Yet the 1996 JSCP-N states that Adaptive Planning " will be a principle means of Reserve force employment , " but that it " can occur in the pre - , trans - , or post-MAO timeframe and involve either SIOP / NSNF or Reserve forces .
Note that Jesus is not saying , " The Father and I are numerically one " ( heis ) , but uses a term meaning " we are together " ( Greek hen , as used again in v. 38 : " The Father is in me and I am in the Father " ) .
( 6 ) A requirement under an enactment for an affirmative vote of a specified portion of all members of a council means an affirmative vote of that portion of the number of members of which the council consists under section 118 [ size of council ] .
" This is a great story about how a person was inspired because of what a property meant to him , " he says .
Facials are a treatment meant to cleanse , firm , smooth and moisturize .
A contradiction means that there is falsehood among the premises that logically imply the contradictory propositions .
The dieroll is an equivalent means of determining the effort brought to bear on a situation .
This is why communism also concerns the real : to act as a communist means to intervene into the real of the basic antagonism which underlies today 's global capitalism .
The tax is a scam meant to fool people into thinking that this government is doing something about the carbon problem , stir up trouble in progressive circles , and derail any effective moves to cut back on carbon emissions .
Bryan Garner , a usage-dictionary writer , calls such terms " skunked " - that is , when a phrase means one thing to some people and another thing to others .
Leading a place means going beyond the measures that are inward looking e.g. REF ) and to understand what we do as an agency in the community .
Now , as Ed Gehrman suggests , we have an electro-mechanical means of assessing truth ?
I do n't think they took that on board , NFH had told me a ROW meant we could all walk over the drive , it 's clear they have no idea .
Public services , of course , play a central role in this Third Way strategy since they are a principal means of identifying , supporting and ' empowering ' disadvantaged groups and individuals .
Currently Mirela is developing a project dedicated to New Writing in Romania - a website meant to promote the new generation of Romanian playwrights .
Using a book meant making it one 's own , often by annotating it , binding it , or putting it to use in particular and sometimes surprising contexts .
Taking your wife on a cruise means circling the Dairy Queen 164 .
The pension and payments made to a GP 's widow in the normal course of things is never mentioned in the press , does the fact that Shipman was a serial-killer mean that his widow ( who had no knowledge of his crimes ) should not be entitled to this cash ?
This is not a book about academic writing , it is a book meant to guide archaeologists who want to write for more general audiences .
" How many of you knew what a revolution meant four years ago ?
Labeling me so sounds pretty judgmental in itself to me , but I 'm probably guilty of both of those things in this instance , though I do n't see how being an atheist means I ca n't have an understanding of social justice ; I try to be good because I want to be to make the world a better place , not because a mythological figure threatens to burn me if I 'm not .
Later that evening , Briony thinks she sees Robbie attacking Cecilia in the library , she reads a note meant for Cecilia , her cousin Lola is sexually assaulted , and she makes an accusation that she will repent for the rest of her life .
181.1 In 1972 a primary means of Army communication in Northern Ireland during a military operation was by voice radio .
Being a director means jack really !
They feared a sudden death because such a death meant they might die unreconciled with their neighbors , their church , and , of course , God .
Mimetic theory helps to make the NT interpretation of prophet clear : being a prophet means to take the perspective of the victim , if not to actually become a victim yourself .
Starting a nonprofit for such a venture means the public knows that these costs wo n't be coming out of their pockets , White said .
Monti is not only a former European Commissioner , but he is also the author of a report commissioned by José Manuel Barroso on the future of the single market -- which was a report meant to plan ways the powers of Brussels could be further extended into every part of the member states economic and fiscal lives , including taking control of corporation tax rates .
For example , the inability to recruit a cook meant that staff had to do the cooking for a number of weeks .
Some people reach for alcohol , and a nightcap means a dash of brandy , a whisky or a glass of wine .
Being a faceworker meant understanding new machines and developing new skills - as can be seen from this picture of the face at Kiveton .
All Talk , no trousers Jonathan Agnew reports that a broadcaster 's commitment to a sport means more than the size of its chequebook .
If a bedroom smells like the funk of a gym , let a character notice .
I lived in New York City during 9 / 11 so I know what an explosion smells like .
It 's part of an intricately pattern wall over-looking a courtyard where peacocks walk , their tails making a shushing sound on the floor which is also tiled in black and white around a basin where a fountain sounds like silver coins chinked in the pocket of a man wishing on the new moon .
For someone like me who thinks a cat requires far too much attention , raising a cow sounds like an inconceivable amount of work .
Demonstrating that one is a triple threat in a theater the size of a closet sounds like a tough task .
Tom really gets into the character of the song , a song sounding like a sixty year old woman - a woman who used to be a hooker in her younger days - lamenting the lack of ' a good man ' .
Happy Happy Birthday lovely Sprout you are more than a little bit handsome and make me thing I too would like a sprout Sounds like you day is going to be fabulous enjoy yourself at PAH and McDonalds and wishing you many many more lovely memory making days in fact years , to come .
Writer Louis Marks really put some thought into telling his story from one inch high , adding some lovely touches such as a gunshot sounding like an almighty explosion , a corroded drain pipe managing to be a means of escape , and the voices down the other end of a telephone sounding like a dull roar .
I 've seen this argument rolled out a few times now and it still palls 10,000 homes a year sounds like alot until you realise that at the moment we are building about 15,000 new homes a month , in 2007 it was about 26,000 a month .
A book sounds like a great idea , although most of the adults that were affected by it will probably have passed on by now .
But £ 100,000 a year sounds like a lot .
Mia is bound and determined to be his captive JeanieLondon - Now a cowgirl sounds like fun !
Other wise the FA to an RE sounds like the next best solution .
A week spent in orbit delivered from a ICBM sounds like fun .
This small and relatively unknown treasures are worthy of our attention and a visit sounds like a good idea .
Talking about his remix of Nathan Fake 's 2004 single " The Sky Was Pink " , he 's said , " These people who 've made rip-offs of that track for a career-that sounds like a punishment that happens in Greek hell , being one of these cunts who has to re-manufacture the same thing over and over again .
A typical excuse for getting a salad sounds like this , " It 's a light satisfying meal " " It 's too hot to eat anything else " " I 'm getting all my nutrients for the day !
While running around naked in the mountains for a day sounds like a good time , attendees and organizers still need to abide by the law .
" A series sounded like more fun , but I wanted to shift the focus from me , to look at the changes in natural-history film-making , science and the natural world .
But a general critique of Israeli policy at such a moment sounds like hectoring .
A couple of weeks ago I thought the guy who a judge found in contempt for refusing to serve on a jury sounded like a douche-bag .
And the idea of the NCAA running such an office sounds like a trap for the Association .
Before today , my VC 50 , running through a Marshall 1960 A cab sounded like a hotrodded plexi .
Even with a headphone amp , lossless files ( which most people do n't use , ) and excellent speakers or phones , listening to an iPod sounds like listening through tinny mud .
Taking a car to a garage sounds like a walk in the park ... although a walk in the park , it is not .
I had n't got very far with thinking about heat exchangers , but not needing a pump sounds like a good argument for a coil .
A third sounded like he knew what he was talking about , but never quoted .
" At first , I thought it was a tornado , " he said , " because they always say a tornado sounds like a train coming .
I live in Bognor Regis so I know what a seagull sounds like .
The winds howl over the tenements of Easterhouse and Castlemilk at its conclusion just as they did over John Leyton 's moors twenty years previously ; as a record it is unparalleled and unequalled , as a number one it is still scarcely believable - did I dream that a record sounding like this and saying what it says went to number one ?
Have ya ever been curious as to what a mushroom sounds like ?
Taking out the third party and making it into an ally rather than an opponent sounded like the perfect strategy - in theory .
Vw is 2 yr unlimited mileage Recon seem to have 50 k limit I do 30 -40 a year Sounds like a no brainer if your doing 30 -40 k miles a year .
But I do know what a blowhard sounds like .
And a cap sounds like a simple and effective way to address the nation 's deficit .
And if getting a trained , certified early-childhood educator for the price of a babysitter sounds like a good deal to you , you 're not the only one .
Our senses know what a room sounds like , but to have your brain spark and say room , you need deep , accurate bass .
Steve 's ( or was it Peter 's ? ) idea of a series sounds like fun .
I 'm reminded of so many other times when there has been a chavista sounding like an opposition , until he does n't ...
Its very difficult for me to put into words what a cymbal sounds like , I can only try and paint a picture for you .
" Expect it , " Teal ' c finished , in a voice sounding like the last trump of judgment .
So disingenuous an account sounds like an accidental recipe for conceptual art ' avant la lettre ' , which of course it is anything but .
Furthermore , hiring a stripper sounds like one of the stupidest possible wastes of one 's money .
Share A Sale sounds like a great network .
Not using a siren at a junction sounds like a deliberate decision - most Blue Light drivers would know that it makes the maneouvre much easier ( & safer ) if they use the siren and creep through - but if there is a reason why the siren might hinder them ( en route to an offence in progress ) , the driver makes the judgement .
